# Introduction

Welcome to the other side of the desk!  We hope that you will find your experience teaching at Queens College as rewarding as it is challenging.  While the principles guiding instruction in our writing classes rest on a firm foundation of pedagogical and rhetorical theory, The Other Side of the Desk concentrates on the practical elements of teaching our writing courses.  This handbook describes the work that you’ll do as a writing instructor, and offers detailed advice about how to perform them.  Its tips and common-sense directives represent the accumulated wisdom of many instructors.  We recognize that, because all teachers tailor their practices to their personalities, values, and goals, you may respond to some suggestions herein with skepticism or outright disagreement.  We further recognize that this handbook imagines those who have never taught at the college level as its primary audience, even though many instructors might have such experience.  Nevertheless, we hope that you will find this a humane and helpful guide. If you have questions along the way, please don’t hesitate to bring them to us—the Directors of First Year Writing.  

## How to Use This Guide

This handbook is divided into five sections.  This first introductory section covers the very basics, such as the goals of English 110, the kinds of support available to you, and the structure of the first year writing program.  This is all stuff that you should be familiar with before you begin teaching at Queens College.  The second section, “Class Documents: Syllabus and Assignments,” provides handy tips for generating the materials as well as samples of the syllabus and assignments that are necessary for the functioning of an organized course.  Instructors are meant to consult this section prior to the beginning of a semester teaching.  The third section, “Teaching Resources,” is a more free-form collection of materials and handouts that you may find useful in your own courses.  These range from tips for generating discussion to guidelines for responding to student work.  You may find yourself coming back to this section repeatedly throughout your teaching career here.  The fourth section, “Procedures,” and the Appendices (“Computing on the Campus,” “Rosenthal Library,” “Useful Queens College Information,” and “Useful Links, Handouts, and Sample Assignments”) are also meant to be on-going resources for you.  They are arranged topically so that you can find information on any procedural concerns that arise or further information on campus policies you may need.  


Support for Instructors
Whether or not this is your first time teaching at the college level, you may be feeling somewhat apprehensive about starting your new teaching assignment this fall.  Know that you will not be alone.  The First Year Writing program will do all we can to facilitate your success and satisfaction as you teach.  We offer several ways to help you meet the challenges of teaching college writing:

The Other Side of the Desk
This guidebook, distributed to all new instructors before they begin teaching, introduces you to your task and serves as a ready resource.  We hope you find it useful and refer to it often.

English 795/793
All new teachers will enroll in a teaching practicum, which is listed as English 795 through the Graduate Center or English 793 through Queens College. The seminar on Teaching College Writing will explore the principles foundational to college writing instruction. The immediate aim of this exploration is to develop a rationale for practice in one’s first year of teaching.  The seminar’s broader aim is to prepare teachers to make curricular and pedagogical choices that range beyond those prescribed by the First Year Writing program in that first year.

First Year Writing Workshops
Throughout the year, the First Year Writing program will offer a series of informal seminars and presentations on a variety of pedagogical issues.  All faculty are invited. Graduate instructors must attend at least three of the four sessions each semester in order to fulfill the hours of their teaching fellowships. 

Sample Materials

The English 110 website (http://english110.qwriting.org/) is a necessary resource for the topics-based course overviews, sample syllabi, pre-draft assignments and activities, and readings. The password for protected information is “english110.” 

The English 130 website (http://eng130.qwriting.qc.cuny.edu/) provides the same kinds of materials for College Writing 2: Writing About Literature.

The department also has websites for the 240-level courses that are the backbone of the major here: http://engl240s.qwriting.qc.cuny.edu/

For sample syllabi for other courses, visit the English Department archive: http://englishdept.qwriting.org/syllabi/. 
The archive contains syllabi from past semesters as well as guidelines and requirements for courses and syllabi. The password for protected information is “klapper”. 

Administrative and Personal Support
The directors of First Year Writing stand ready to help you with difficulties as they arise. And the English department office staff can answer many of your basic questions. Don’t forget that one of your best resources for teaching advice is the informal network of other graduate students and instructors (your officemates, classmates, and friends).

Goals of English 110/College Writing 1

Although each of us has different expectations of our students, collectively we share some common goals for our writing courses.  All of these goals are based on the philosophy that within an environment of process-centered learning and collaboration, the mission of the teacher is to help students become successful academic writers.
Course philosophy
The primary goal of English 110 is to introduce students to the writing strategies and methods of inquiry that are at the heart of a liberal arts education and the College’s General Education curriculum. To foster this kind of authority, English 110 puts writing at its center. In other words, it sequences assignments and class activities to teach the craft, rhetoric, and processes of writing. Students pursue questions of scholarly consequence as they build the authority they need to write their way into existing intellectual conversations. We recognize that college-level writing looks very different and functions very differently across disciplinary boundaries, but we hope to help our students meet those wide-ranging challenges with aplomb.  
To achieve that goal, we organize our syllabi around interdisciplinary topics, rendering English 110 not an “English” class in the conventional sense.  We aim to place no particular emphasis on literary study, because we take seriously our obligation to teach our students how scholars across the curriculum gather and analyze evidence in writing.  

We know that one semester is woefully insufficient to meet this goal.   A recent high school graduate will not instantly write with the authority of a professional in any field—much less every field—but we hope to set her on that path with solid footing by articulating for her the expectations of the scholarly community we share.  

Expectations for the course include…
…preparing students for college writing expectations.  
Our program focuses primarily on the conventions of academic writing, because we embrace our obligation to prepare first-year students to succeed in their General Education courses and their majors.  We focus on academic analysis and argumentation, and on critical thinking and reading, and aim to help our students build the interdisciplinary foundations that they need to write well in any context they choose.  Most immediately, we prepare students to succeed in College Writing 2, which they will take after English 110 in a discipline of their choice.   
…introducing students to expository strategies.  
Because First Year Writing is designed as a first step to critical thinking, we teach students the rhetorical skills they need to analyze scholarly evidence, and to evaluate their analyses in the context of others’.  Students learn a variety of strategies that help them to probe texts and definitions, compare summaries, evaluate perspectives, and sustain an argument.  Their ability to comprehend and use the knowledge and views of others to construct knowledge and write informed arguments of their own will largely determine their success in the course.  To some considerable extent, then, you will be teaching your students to read as well as to write on a college level.
…teaching the importance of revision.  
As we teach our students to revise their drafts into polished essays, we aim to help them strengthen their writing processes. Focusing on process as well as product, we explore how, given a writing task, writers decide on an angle of attack; how they research, organize, and narrow their field of inquiry; how they arrange, compose, revise, and edit their language; and how they determine when to stop.
In truth, no piece of writing is ever really finished.  Even professional writers know that what has gone to press could have been better.  As they learn and internalize viable revision processes, students can evaluate and even question feedback from their peers and their instructor.  They can discover what awkward and vague really mean, and do something to remedy imprecise communications.  They can monitor what is getting through to their audience and what is not, and they can pressure their editors to be more exact as well.  Putting a work through several drafts gives students the sense of how an essay grows and changes, and the facility they gain from rewriting should help as well on those occasions when they are writing against the clock, with no time for revision.
…developing students’ rhetorical skills and knowledge.  
To help our students become more conscious of the choices they make as writers, we discuss with them the purpose of every assignment, and we note the ways that purposes shape both the form and the content of writing.  Since first year writing courses emphasize academic writing, we focus on helping students respond to the exigencies and conventions of academic discourse.  We teach students to respond to various audiences and rhetorical situations of the academy by adopting the appropriate styles and genres for those contexts.   
…helping students to learn from one another.  
As students read and respond to their peers’ papers, whether finished or in-progress, they develop a writing vocabulary and learn revision strategies they can apply to their own work.  Student texts can be as valuable a learning tool as professional writing, and we encourage you to use examples of student writing in the classroom.  We also suggest that you arrange for students to work collaboratively on some of their projects, since teamwork is productive for many students, and we aim to strengthen the community of writers at Queens College.

For more information, see the goals and guidelines for English 110.
What English 110 Is Not

Many instructors who teach English 110 never took a first-year course in college writing.  They may have placed out with AP credit, or taken a literature-based composition course instead.  For those of you who have no model to draw on in designing a writing course, or who have taught an introductory writing course with different aims elsewhere, here are a few observations about what first year writing at Queens College is not:
ENGL 110 is not a grammar course.  You will be expected, of course, to help your students with grammatical problems.  You will be a resource for their grammatical questions, and offer explanations as needed.  But you won’t be spending regular class time diagramming sentences or giving quizzes on verb tenses, or failing papers for excessive comma splices.
ENGL 110 is not a course in personal writing (“How I spent my summer vacation”), nor is it a “modes” course, wherein students spend two weeks on argument, two weeks on description, and two more on comparison and contrast.  It’s also not a course in which we imitate the stylistic devices of others.  Our courses teach students to write well in college in part by helping them comprehend and respond to the words and ideas of others.
ENGL 110 is not a literature or film course, nor is it a course in creative writing.  Instead, our mission is to help students learn to write academic prose suitable for course work at Queens College.
Finally, ENGL 110 is not a weed-out course.  It is designed to help students succeed in college, not to identify underprepared students and fail them.



Learning Communities/FYI
The Freshman Year Initiative is a unique program that brings entering students together in two thematically linked courses during their first semester at Queens College. FYI communities link a General Education Perspectives course and an English 110 course. One or both of your English 110s may be in an FYI community, which means all of the students in your class will also be enrolled in the same General Education class.  In addition to providing a social connection for students new to college, the communities also introduce students to the concept of interdisciplinarity, as they explore the ways in which different fields engage in intellectual inquiry of subject matter in different ways.  Ideally, instructors from the two classes will share syllabi and other information about their courses and their respective classrooms, and may choose to collaborate on readings, assignments, or a community event such as a field trip, a lecture, or a performance. Each community is assigned a community leader who will be in touch with you about these collaborations. Instructors are compensated for their work in an FYI community, and you should receive paperwork from the FYI office to get paid.  If you have any questions about payment, send an email with your question to Ann Davison (anndavisonqc@gmail.com), Susan Braver (susan.braver@qc.cuny.edu), and Marty Braun (martin.braun@qc.cuny.edu).


College Writing 2 (a.k.a. English Composition 2) 
English Composition 2 According to Pathways
Under Pathways, Queens College has the mandate to create a second composition class that has these learning outcomes:
• Read and listen critically and analytically, including identifying an argument’s major assumptions and assertions and evaluating its supporting evidence.
• Write clearly and coherently in varied, academic formats (such as formal essays, research papers, and reports) using standard English and appropriate technology to critique and improve one’s own and others’ texts.
• Demonstrate research skills using appropriate technology, including gathering, evaluating, and synthesizing primary and secondary sources.
• Support a thesis with well-reasoned arguments, and communicate persuasively across a variety of contexts, purposes, audiences, and media.
• Formulate original ideas and relate them to the ideas of others by employing the conventions of ethical attribution and citation.

College Writing 2 (CW2) at Queens
Although this mandate comes from beyond Queens College, we aim to use it to support our ongoing efforts to strengthen our curriculum by linking writing instruction more closely with General Education.  In that spirit, we call it “College Writing” rather than “English Composition,” and we frame it as the next logical step from the interdisciplinary work that our students do in English 110 (soon to be College Writing 1).  CW2 will teach students how to identify and practice the conventions of scholarly writing in a particular discipline.

To ensure that this discipline-specific work benefits students in every major, CW2 will be offered not only in the English Department, but in departments and divisions across campus.   Students will be encouraged to take their second writing course in a department that is in—or institutionally near—their major, so that they learn to gather and analyze evidence in the ways that their discipline values most.  Appropriate titles for CW2 might be: Writing About History; Writing About Biology; Writing About Literature, for example.

CW2 is distinguishable from CW1 by its disciplinary lens, and it is distinguishable from gateway courses in the majors by its attention to writing.  Students in every section of CW2 will attend to writing in class in one or more of the following possible forms: a) discussion of papers before they are written and after they are returned; b) reading aloud of successful papers or models; c) discussion of the rhetorical strategies or writerly qualities of course readings; d) the occasional use of informal, ungraded writing to stimulate class discussion.

For more on English 130, the CW2 course in the English department, see Appendix VI.
 
About Your Students

Every one of your classes will have its own socio-cultural makeup just as it develops its own dynamics, chemistry, and personality, but you may benefit from some broad representations of your students prior to meeting them.  On the one hand, Queens College draws students from across the country as well as the world.  On the other hand, about ninety percent of the undergraduate population comes from New York City or its surrounding areas (Long Island and downstate New York).  As a consequence, English 110 classes often simultaneously bring together students with diverse backgrounds, students for whom English is a second (or third) language and students from small or underfunded high schools as well as a suburban middle-class culture.   

Of the many literacies students bring to this campus, two deserve mention here.  Recent research conducted by the college show that over half comes from a home where English is spoken as a second language.  This figure can be misleading, since in many cases it describes students who are thoroughly, and often powerfully, bilingual.  But in some cases, students for whom English is a second language enter college needing plenty of attention to their writing.  Such students cannot be identified by name or appearance, of course; instead, their background manifests itself in culturally-derived styles of argumentation, in syntactic choices marked as unconventional, and the like. We think it’s important that instructors respond positively and helpfully to these students’ writing.

Increasingly, students entering the university demonstrate literacy in electronic technologies associated with writing.  Specifically, anecdotal evidence suggests that many (but not all) first-year students have some experience in sending and receiving e-mail, in using computers, and in using the Internet for research purposes.  Some students may know much more about electronic technologies than their instructors; at the other end of the spectrum, you may encounter students who find such technologies daunting.  It makes sense, therefore, to check with your students before assuming that all of them are knowledgeable about and comfortable with electronic writing technologies. We take it as part of our job to help students practice professional communication through e-mail, knowing that their future professors and employers will expect that of them.

110 classes in FYI communities will be comprised almost entirely of first-year students who must meet the college’s College Writing I requirement while unlinked 110 classes are almost entirely non-freshmen. Students enter English 110 with a host of attitudes about writing (ranging from pleasurable anticipation to paralyzing dread) and about themselves as writers (ranging from pride to shame).  Most students will have had solid training in some modes of writing—especially descriptive prose, personal narratives, informational reports, and responses to literature; most students have demonstrated the ability to organize an essay, form coherent paragraphs, and write clearly communicative sentences.  For all their ability and training, however, relatively few students entering our classes have learned to think of writing as a broad panoply of skills, or discovered that they have both strengths and weaknesses across this spectrum of skills.  Nor will many of your students have substantial experience in critical reading, detailed analysis, or scholarly research.  In short, they need the skills our English 110 courses teach.

As a rule of thumb, students will rise to the level of expectations you set, but they may struggle initially, as all writers do when they first encounter new audiences and new demands on their writing.  You and your students will thrive as you respect their abilities, emphasize their successes, and overlook some of their failures.  Your role is not that of a controller so much as a facilitator; in our classrooms, we suggest, guide, and challenge, rather than prescribe, constrain, and thwart.

All freshmen take English 110 in their first semester, unless their performance on the CUNY/ACT basic skills tests in reading and writing warrants placement in English as a Second Language (ESL) or College English as a Second Language (CESL). These courses are designed to meet the English language needs of students with limited proficiency in English. Students take one or more semesters of these courses and must then demonstrate appropriate readiness for advancement before they register for English 110. The Academic Support Center, located in Kiely Hall 227 and directed by Dr. Howard Kleinmann, administers these courses, as well as other programs in academic skills development. The office coordinates the Writing Center (Kiely Hall 229), and the Academic Support Lab (Kiely Hall 131), which provide tutoring and other support services in writing, reading, and a variety of academic courses.  These services are available to all students at the college. English 95 exists to help non-native students of English who choose to enroll in an additional semester of writing instruction to prepare them for 110.



Queens College and Its Mission

from the Queens College 2010-2011 Factbook, prepared by the Office of Institutional Research

Established in 1937 to offer a strong liberal arts education to working-class people, Queens College has grown to an enrollment of 20,906 students in Fall 2010, including 16,195 undergraduate and 4,711 graduate students. Of the Fall 2010 undergraduate students, 73% attended full-time and 27% part-time. Of the graduate students, 11% attend full-time and 89% part-time. While known for its strong liberal arts emphasis, Queens College also offers professional degrees on both the graduate and undergraduate levels. Students come from nearly 170 different countries and speak over 110 different languages.

Queens College is part of the City University System, which ranked high on the Forbes College Rankings list. “Forbes, which worked with the Center for College Affordability and Productivity to compile the list, indicating that it sought to determine which colleges best met students’ needs, rather than which came with the best reputation. The lists’ creators considered graduates’ success in their chosen career field; their average salaries; the schools’ retention and graduation rates; and student evaluations of their professors and classes, as well as the cost of the institution and amount of debt upon graduation.”

Queens College is listed in the Princeton Review’s The Best 373 Colleges, and as one of the “Best Public Universities-Master’s” institutions in U.S. News and World Report’s America’s Best Colleges, which includes Queens in the top tier of Regional Northeast master’s-level colleges. In addition, Queens College also is listed online under the Best Graduate Schools for Library Information Science Programs, Fine Arts Schools, Psychology Schools, and Speech Pathology Schools. In Spring 2011, the Education Trust issued a report in which Queens College was listed as one of five colleges that are doing a good job serving low-income students. [For further information, see “Priced Out: How the Wrong Financial-Aid Policies Hurt Low-Income Students” (www.edtrust.org/sites/edtrust.org/files/publications/files/PricedOutFINAL2.0_0.pdf/).]




















Class Documents: Syllabus and Assignments

This section outlines in detail the important components of your course syllabus. The next section, “Teaching Resources,” contains further information on course planning and preparing for the first few days of teaching.

Preparing the Syllabus

Thinking About Your Syllabus

With your syllabus you give your students essential information about your course, but you also give them a model of professionalism and a reason to get excited about all that they will learn. Your syllabus should function as a document that both pushes you to plan your semester and also one that has the built-in structure and mechanism to make it an easily accessible document for your students and for yourself. Since this is the first document that students will receive in your classroom, as well as one they will be referring to at various points throughout the semester, it is important that the syllabus appears thorough, organized and accessible. Think about setting a tone in your syllabus that you would like to set in your classroom and make it a model of good writing. Avoid making empty threats or setting boundaries that you don’t plan to meet, since this will only confuse your class. Think back to examples of syllabi that worked best for you as a student. When you are able to give students a clear idea of the policies of your classroom, a document that is easily understandable, and has major dates for projects, they will gain a sense of comfort by building their own set of expectations for the writing classroom. 

Many people choose to use the course description on the syllabus or other areas of the syllabus as a space to express what kinds of behavior and interaction they expect in the classroom that will help make the semester run smoothly. You might find it helpful to talk about the interactive nature of the writing classroom, the nature of peer reviews, the need to keep up with readings and assignments, and the willingness to be prepared to participate in class discussion. If you are able to communicate the respect you have for your students and for your own classroom, you are likely to inspire this respect from them for you and for each other.

Having your syllabus ready for the first day of class allows you to feel (and appear) organized and ready for the semester. It is helpful to show the students by example that the syllabus is essentially a contract for the semester, which both you and they need to respect. Read through your policies during the class period (or have students read) and discuss different sections of the syllabus. This may be the only time your students sit down and really read these policies, so make the most of this time and reinforce the importance of the information. While you have given your students a hard copy of the document, you may want to also include a copy that can be accessed on the web if this fits your needs. In future classes, refer to course policies, being careful to discuss due dates, changed dates, and penalties that surround missing requirements for each major assignment.

Planning Your Class

As the semester quickly approaches, planning an entire course can seem overwhelming. It is important to keep in mind that you may not want to plan every unit in detail prior to the start of the semester. The syllabus, no matter how carefully planned, is likely to be changed as you adjust to the needs of your students and your goals for the course.  On the other hand, you certainly will want to have some firm plans before you start the semester’s teaching. As you plan your course, you should do the following:

Establish Course Goals. It is important that all instructors understand these goals as a fundamental component of the First Year Writing program at Queens College. Goals should be assessable by a paper, an exam, or some other assignment, but you do not have to specify the means of assessment on the syllabus. The ten Learning Goals for English 110 are listed on page 12. Instructors usually choose to represent a smaller number of these goals on a syllabus, or adapt them to suit their courses. Following the Learning Goals are some examples of goals from past English 110 syllabi (page 13). This should help you see the ways that the general goals can be adapted into specific goals for your course.
Establish the sequence of skills you will teach in each unit
Decide how or if you will revise the sample course(s) for your topic (further information on the topics-based English 110 courses is on page 15). Determine the essays you will assign, the percentage of the grade they will count for, and due dates for the assignments and possible revision dates
Plan your first unit of the semester in detail with formal writing assignment, pre-draft assignments and readings.

Parts of the Syllabus

The syllabus is comprised of two main sections, your course policies and a “syllabus” or list of dates and assignments for the semester. The amount of detail used in the syllabus varies from classroom to classroom. You will need to include specific assignments, readings, and due dates for the semester.

Included below are the different elements of the syllabus that you must include. See page 19 for a sample syllabus. These elements of the syllabus are required by the College and the state:

1. Course name, title, and section
2. Instructor contact information and office hours (for office hour requirements, see page 43)
3. Course meeting information
4. Course texts (required and optional, if any) and how they can be obtained (bookstore, course packet, Blackboard, class blog, etc.)
5. Course overview/description, which should be the topic description (found in the course overview). You might also include all or part of the bulletin description for English 110.
6. Course assignments/requirements (see page 15 for assignment parameters)
7. Attendance/class participation policy (see page 28)
8. Grade breakdown/grading criteria (see page 48)
9. Plagiarism/CUNY academic integrity policy (see page 55)
10. Linked course information
11. Writing Center information (see page 72)
12. Respectful conduct/language use policy
13. Late paper/make-up exam policy
14. Disability accommodations
15. A dated schedule of readings and assignments, draft and final paper due dates, and exam dates. The schedule can be a tentative one that is amended as you go along. See page 14 for hints on setting dates.
16. A list of Learning Goals separate from the course description. If you don’t like the term Learning Goals, you can use Course Goals, Goals, Course Objectives, or some other term that indicates to the students that the listed items reflect what the course will help them achieve. They are not “teaching goals,” however, and the individual goals should be worded in a way that is aimed at the students: for example, “You will learn . . . ,” “Students will be able to . . . ,” “The course will help students understand . . . ,” etc. For more information on Learning Goals, see page 12. 



Learning Outcomes

The required learning outcomes (prescribed by the current description for English 110 and by the description of College Writing 2 in Pathways) are included below. 

A course in this area must meet all of the following learning outcomes. A student will:

a.	Attend to writing in class, in one or more of the following forms: 
	• discussion of papers before they are written and after they are returned; 
	• reading aloud of successful papers or models; 
	• discussion of the rhetorical strategies or writerly qualities of course readings; 
	• the occasional use of informal, ungraded writing to stimulate class discussion. 

b.	Read and listen critically and analytically, including identifying an argument’s major assumptions and assertions and evaluating its supporting evidence. 
c.	Write clearly and coherently in varied, academic formats (such as formal essays, research papers, and reports) using standard English and appropriate technology to critique and improve one’s own and others’ texts. 
d.	Demonstrate research skills using appropriate technology, including gathering, evaluating, and synthesizing primary and secondary sources. 
e.	Support a thesis with well-reasoned arguments, and communicate persuasively across a variety of contexts, purposes, audiences, and media. 
f.     Formulate original ideas and relate them to the ideas of others by employing the conventions of 
      ethical attribution and citation.
Learning Goals for English 110 
Our ten goals, which can be adapted and revised to fit your own course-specific goals (see following examples of adapted goals).
Students who complete English 110 will be able to:
1. Develop an awareness of the craft, rhetoric, and process of writing.
2. Identify strengths and weaknesses in their writing and articulate strategies for improvement.
3. Adapt the elements of writing–including thesis, audience, motive, evidence, analysis, and structure–to a variety of writing contexts.
4. Read critically and write fluently in a variety of genres, including the following possibilities in print and digital media: argumentative essays, narrative essays, ethnographic essays, case studies, blogs, letters to the editor, or wiki pages.
5. Understand the guidelines for a variety of assignments and to respond to these guidelines with imagination and ingenuity.
6. Articulate how rhetoric and ideas work together to produce meaning.
7. Revise and edit their work effectively.
8. Demonstrate a proficiency in methods of research and documentation, including the evaluation of secondary sources, annotation, integration of quotations, and proper citation according to a discipline appropriate guideline (such as MLA, APA, or Chicago).
9. Recognize the conventions and methods of various disciplines in the liberal arts and sciences.
10. Make connections with other courses in terms of both content and methods of critical inquiry.

Here are some sample learning goals, drawn from last semester’s syllabi, showing how the ten Learning Goals above can be adapted by instructors:

In learning to compose academic arguments, students will learn how to . . .
Obtain overall fluency in the elements of academic writing, including thesis, evidence, analysis, format, revision, critical reading, summary, and paraphrase. 

Make use of prewriting and invention techniques, including freewriting, notetaking, brainstorming, developing ideas through a process of planning, drafting, revising, & editing. 

Learn a variety of rhetorical strategies (including tone, context, genre, form, audience) and types of essays (including descriptive, narrative, analytical, argumentative, expository). 

Employ standard usage of English grammar and mechanics, including spelling, capitalization, sentence structure, punctuation. 

Understand the conventions of oral presentations; prepare and deliver them; lead discussions based on such presentations.

In writing research papers, students will learn how to . . .
Identify genuine intellectual problems and conduct scholarly research by learning to recognize the conventions of literary and cultural criticism and theoretical academic essays.   

Find and incorporate relevant source material into writing, using appropriate scholarly resources like books, journals, indexes, online catalogues, web search engines, and libraries. 

In reading and analyzing literature, students will learn to . . . 
Appreciate the differences among various ethnic groups and immigrant writings and identify common concerns and the diversity of voices.  

In their own creative writing, students will . . . 
Practice a range of poetic, fictional, and dramatic modes and techniques and develop an awareness of critical methods in a workshop setting. 

In this course, students will be able to 
Distinguish the major differences between Neoclassical and Romantic poetry in terms of style, theme, and overall philosophy. 

Helpful Hints for Setting Dates for the Syllabus

Keep a calendar handy and mark out all vacation days, first and last days of classes
Schedule any major due dates for the semester: this may include first drafts and final drafts of each essay assignment as well as a plan for the stages of the research paper
Schedule your conference dates (see page 41 for more explanation)
Establish the units of study you want to cover. As we suggested above, it’s a good idea to identify the skills you want students to learn, and then identify readings or issues that will help you teach those skills.
Allow for flexibility. You can advise students in the syllabus you distribute that your due dates are subject to change. As you begin course work of your own, try to coordinate assignment due dates, where possible, with your own obligations as a student. Don’t plan to grade a set of research papers the week before your own seminar paper is due. If possible, build in one or two “free dates” in your syllabus, so that you can adjust to the pace of a particular set of students.
Feel free to ask students about their prior writing experiences to gauge the level of your classroom. The diagnostic essay that you will give on the first or second day of class (often a better choice since some students may change their schedules after that first day) can also serve as a space for students to discuss their prior experiences with writing and serve as another way for you to get to know them and their writing.
Think about having major due dates before breaks to encourage students to attend class
Refer to your colleagues’ syllabi to get a sense of a reasonable timeline, recalling that most of us tend to squeeze in too much in too little time.

Developing Units of Sequenced Readings and Assignments

Our program website (http://english110.qwriting.org/) provides topics resources that include lists of readings to choose from and assignment sequences to adapt. Make sure to give yourself time to consider what you would like your students to take away from the classroom. Choose material that allows you to work with specific sets of skills and also material that allows for variety of subject matter. The next section contains a detailed description of the topics-based assignment sequences for 110. 

This is a debated area of the syllabus, which will surely continue to evolve as policy and awareness evolve.  Our understanding (per OSS) is that you cannot require students to share their disability status with you. Please DO NOT ask them to do so as part of your accommodations statement. 

The basic statement is below: 

NOTE ABOUT SPECIAL ACCOMMODATION: If you have a learning, sensory, or physical need for special accommodation in this class, contact the Office of Special Services in 171 Kiely Hall at 718-997-5870. 

To consider: 
Many of us put this section of the syllabus at the end, simply because that’s how it’s always been done. Consider different places for the accessibility statement, and how they might reflect your values as an educator. 
Consider a broader accessibility statement.  You MUST include the basic statement above someplace on your syllabus, but you can place it within the context of a broader statement if you choose to do so. 
Consider a broader range of accessibility issues. Many students use their phones to access texts because they don’t have a personal computer. Many students live very far from campus, and will have difficulty accessing physical reserve materials. Think about issues of tech/resource accessibility when you make your class policies and accessibility statements. 


Examples of other effective statements: 

NOTE ABOUT SPECIAL ACCOMMODATION: If you have a learning, sensory, or physical need for special accommodation in this class, contact the Office of Special Services in 171 Kiely Hall at 718-997-5870. If you feel comfortable informing me of your need for accommodation, please do so.  You are entitled to and deserve accommodations that will allow you to learn, so please never hesitate to reach out for help to me or to the Office of Special Services. We are here to give you the supports you need and deserve in order to learn.  

From Jennifer Polish’s (jpolish1@qc.cuny.edu) “Mobility in a Cultural Context”: 

If you have a learning, sensory, physical, or other reason for needing any kind of special  accommodation in this class, contact the Office of Special Services in 171 Kiely Hall at 718.997.5870, and please feel free to reach out to me for additional assistance.

This approach, from Hilarie Ashton’s (hashton@qc.cuny.edu) “Race and Gender in Celebrity Culture,” highlights Ashton’s pedagogical stance towards accessibility: 

UNIVERSAL LEARNING: In the spirit of Universal Design for Learning, I work towards an environment that is equitable and conducive to learning for all students. I also ask that we all use inclusive language in written and oral work. If you require accommodation in this class, please contact the Office of Special Services in Kiely Hall 171 or at (718) 997-5870. I encourage anyone with disabilities or particular needs that impact your work to meet with me to co-design accommodations. (hat tip to Cindy Lewiecki-Wilson)

Writing Assignments

Topics-based Curriculum and Assignment Sequences
We design our assignments around a skeletal form that is shared by every section of College Writing 1.  The program asks each instructor to create a “Course Overview” that makes this sequence evident. The overviews are designed to emphasize particular elements of writing and demonstrate how writing assignments give students practice with these elements. In addition, the overviews demonstrate how the goals that students achieve in earlier reading and writing assignments enable them to meet the requirements of later, more complex assignments. The content of each course varies with the topics, so the assignments vary accordingly, too, with this structure in common. Appendix IV of this handbook contains four sample assignments (page 102), and the Qwriting site (http://english110.qwriting.org/) provides course overviews, assignment sequences, syllabi, and other resources. 
Because we work to give our students a common language for talking about writing across the disciplines, we write our assignments to articulate the intellectual work that each essay requires. More about our approach to writing assignments follows in this section. Another great resource is Kerry Walk’s “Teaching with Writing” (http://www.princeton.edu/writing/university/resources/TWW.pdf).
Students in this course write four formal essays, of which at least three resemble essays that they would write in a General Education course.  One of those essays entails original research, and all of them enable students to practice a writing process that includes pre-drafts anttpd revisions.  Students’ written and oral conversations with each other and their instructor inform those revisions.

The assignments can be sequenced in one of two ways.

Option 1: All four formal assignments give students practice in common forms scholarly writing.

Essay 1: Analyze a single primary source to support an arguable thesis.

Essay 2: Develop an argument to analyze the tension you see between two sources (either two primary sources, or one primary and one secondary).

Essay 3: Use a secondary source as a lens to analyze a primary source, and support your thesis with evidence.

Essay 4: Develop an analytical argument using original research that includes both primary and secondary sources.

Option 2: Three of the four formal essays give students practice in scholarly writing.  The fourth gives students an opportunity to present scholarly evidence to an audience that is specified (e.g., readers of The New Yorker; policymakers considering an issue of relevance to the course; scholars in the field of anthropology).  

Essay 1: Analyze a single primary source to support an arguable thesis.

Essay 2: Use a secondary source to analyze a primary source, and support your thesis with evidence.

Essay 3: Develop an analytical argument using original research that includes both primary and secondary sources.

Essay 4: Present your research within the conventions of a particular genre (e.g., an annotated bibliography, an op-ed piece, a review essay, a personal essay) that is particularly relevant to the course topic.   

Ground Rules for the Assignments

Every assignment enables students to write a wide variety of theses.  Binarisms (pro/con; compare/contrast) and leading questions are eschewed.

Every assignment asks students to go beyond descriptive theses.  The imperative to write a thesis with a motive is clearly stated.   

Assignments are reducible to a single sentence.

Every assignment articulates the need for evidence and analysis.


In addition to the four formal essays, there should be other forms of writing your students should engage in during the semester. These can include:
Blogging, journals, or response papers.  These can be used for class preparation, essay and research preparation, or as an inducement to write every day (a journal is literally a "daily writing").  Blogs and journals seem to be most successful when students are given a question or prompt to respond to.  How you assess or grade them varies according to how you use it in class.  
In-class writing assignments.  Informal in-class writing makes students more comfortable with their own and their peers’ writing.  It also allows students to discover and engage with ideas for longer, more polished papers.  Even if you don’t grade these informal assignments, you can figure them into the students’ final grades under the rubric of “homework,” using a check/no check system.
Avoid using writing as a punishment; many students already tend to view writing as an onerous task, and that’s an attitude we’d like to change.
Guidelines for English 110 
Writing Assignments foster a conversation about the course topic with:
• At least four formal essays over the course of the semester, for a total of at least 4,000 words. However, an annotated bibliography or some other writing-intensive project may be substituted for the fourth essay.
• At least one formal research essay or project that introduces students to using and evaluating library resources. Sources should include both physical and online materials, such as CUNY+, appropriate research databases like JSTOR or EBSCOHost, and Rosenthal Library. Additionally, all 110 courses should schedule at least one meeting with a librarian (see information about library session, page 79).
• Pre-draft writing, drafts, and revisions of all formal writing assignments. At least one of these revisions should be done as a peer review.
• Regular, ungraded informal pieces of writing (both in class and outside). 
Reading Assignments serve writing assignments, as they are selected with writing in mind and are examined from a rhetorical point of view. In addition, they should be limited to what may be discussed in class or on an electronic forum. Because of this, students in English 110 read to learn:
• Methods for active engagement with a variety of texts and genres of appropriate difficulty for college freshmen.
• Principles of excellent writing—for example, the development of a style appropriate to a particular audience, responsible use of evidence, and methods of analysis.
• The conventions of academic writing and other genres.
• How academic sources “speak” in “conversation,” and how to intervene among them with authority in writing.
Every student in English 110 conducts original research and enters into a scholarly community through:
• A process of inquiry that he or she devises through the analysis of evidence.
• A clearly defined policy on academic integrity that is stated on the course syllabus.
• The academic conventions of citation, which they practice by integrating source material into their writing (see section on Teaching Source Use, page 57).
• The distinctions they draw between primary and secondary sources.
• The regular use of “The Goals for Student Writing at Queens College” (http://writingatqueens.org/) and a vocabulary for discussing elements of writing, such as Gordon Harvey’s “Elements of Academic Writing” (page 92).
• When possible or appropriate, a digital platform that encourages formal and/or informal student writing. The digital platforms could include anything from blogs, wikis, podcasts, videos, Blackboard discussion threads, Epsilen software, social networking sites, or anything along those lines. For more information, see section on technology in the classroom, page 79.
Ten Suggestions for Writing Assignments

1.  Choose your writing assignments carefully.  Spend time selecting and formulating your assignment.  Well-developed assignments are more likely to yield fine student papers than topics thrown together hastily. Try to anticipate how students will handle a topic: they may respond in ways you hadn’t counted on.
2.  Be specific about requirements.  Always hand out your assignments in written form; specify due dates, length, format, background readings, grading criteria, and the purpose of the assignment.
3.  Integrate your assignments.  Make sure there is a relationship between in-class work and out-of-class work; encourage your students to talk about (and write about) their assignments in class.  Devote a part of class discussion to the purpose and the position of a particular assignment within the syllabus.  Provide some background information, and create a context in which your students can understand the assignment.  Allow plenty of time for questions related to the assignment.  Schedule some time to do prewriting exercises in class. 
4.  Time your assignments well.  Do not overburden the students when you are working under heavy pressure.  Don’t ask your students to hand in Essay #2 if you still haven’t returned Essay #1, graded and commented upon; they deserve to see what they did well, and not-so-well, on their last paper before they submit another one.  Try to return regular essays within one week; two weeks is reasonable for the longer research papers.  Delays in returning graded papers considerably weaken the impact of your feedback.
5.  Use varied and interesting topics.  Provide a choice of topics, or allow your students to create their own subtopics.  Find out what the interests of your students are and use their suggestions whenever practical.  Take into account that your own cultural background may not be the same as your students’; avoid unreflectively ethnocentric topics.
6.  Prevent plagiarism.  When you borrow topics, tailor them to your own purposes; never use a borrowed assignment verbatim.  Make students turn in their drafts, notes, annotated articles, and outlines with the final copy of the essay.  Original thinking for topics, combined with sufficient guidance during the writing process, should diminish the possibility of plagiarism.  Many students simply don’t recognize the difference between their own writing and someone else’s: it’s your job to teach that very important aspect of the academic writing genre.
7.  Clarify the difference between types and contexts of writing.  Explain the difference between an essay and an impromptu.  Some of your students are unaware that out-of-class essays will require more revision (and hence more time) than in-class ones, and so they think it’s perfectly normal to begin working on an essay the day (or hour) before it’s due.  You can dispel such notions by encouraging students to be as self-analytical as possible about their writing.  Encourage them to consider their own (and others’) writing processes, whether they’re working on an out-of-class essay, an in-class one, or a ten-minute exercise. 
Many students do not know how to prewrite.  They compose their papers the night before they’re due because they don’t know what else to do.  Teach the writing process: model it, discuss it, and give students a chance to practice it in class, under your supervision and with the help of their classmates.
8.  Allow for student feedback.  Informal in-class writing provides your students with a chance to express how they feel about their writing assignments, which topics they want to write about, and how they see their own writing as part of the course goals.  Some instructors ask their students to write a paragraph about the essay they’re about to turn in, assessing its merits or describing their writing process; students then submit this paragraph with the paper.
9.  Expose students to each others’ writing.  Ask your students for permission to reproduce their papers for class discussion, or simply do it anonymously (don’t restrict yourself to what you consider a “good” paper; use “mediocre” papers as well).  Turn peer editing into a constructive writing assignment.

10. Announce your office hours in your syllabus and repeat the invitation often.  Make sure your students know that they can make appointments for discussion of their work-in-progress.  Use conferences or tutorial sessions to discuss drafts of essays.

Course Calendar
We suggest that you be as specific as possible in your course calendar.  It is an important tool for students to visualize and plan for the semester. 

Best practices for the 110 course calendar: 
Include clear directions in the structure of the calendar (ex: “Read this”). New students are often confused by the fact that work is due on the day it is written on the syllabus (different from high school). Clear directions will help them navigate. 
Use visual clues to reinforce the organization of the calendar (bold, italics, bullets, spacing, etc.)
Highlight the difference between different kinds of assignments (reading, writing, drafting, etc.)
Link directly to readings from course calendar when possible. 
Attribute texts in a consistent and clear way. 
Clearly mark days when the class doesn’t meet, or when it meets in a different location (many students -- and teachers--have trouble getting used to the Friday/Monday thing at CUNY)
If you’re asking your students to meet you in the library, remind them on your syllabus to BRING THEIR ID and to have it enabled by the front desk. In our experience, many first years don’t enter the library until their English 110 instructor requires them to do so.  They will not be able to get through the door without having their card enabled. (This is one reason why it’s smart to physically bring them to the library early in the semester to have their cards enabled, and then return later in the semester for an ‘official’ library visit.)

Examples: 

An excerpt from Jennifer Polish’s (jpolish1@qc.cuny.edu) syllabus “English 110: Mobility in a Cultural Context”: 

2/4            “Fast Car”
                Reading:                 Aronowitz, “End of the Road”            
On youtube, watch:
·      Tracy Chapman, “Fast Car” (lyrics here)
·      SaintHannah93, “Amy//Eleven – Fast Car”
·      Rihanna, “Shut Up and Drive” (lyrics here)
·      superdario1000, “Wreck-It Ralph – Shut up and Drive”
                      
2/9             NO CLASS (Queens College follows a Friday schedule)
2/11            Metal Boxes on Roads
               Reading:                    Pratt, “Reading Maps: One”
               Reading About Writing:            “How to Blog With a Twist, Not a Shopping List”
                                                           Kramer, “Writing with Purpose”
2/16            Dis/abling Transportation
           Reading:                     Hendricks, “Living in Car Culture without a 
License”
          Reading About Writing:             Williams, “Writing Can Take Many Forms”
          Due:                     Pre-Draft, Assignment # 1

An excerpt from Lauren Bailey’s (lbailey@qc.cuny.edu) “Reading NYC Film” Syllabus:  

Course Schedule:
Please note that this schedule is subject to change. I will email in advance if the schedule needs to shift. The updated syllabus and schedule will always be posted online to the course website.
*Starred readings= to be read in-class. Please bring with you.
Th, 8/27 In-class:
Intro and welcome
Good vs. “bad” writing
Grammar: writing and film
*Gordon Harvey, “Elements of the Academic Essay”
*Academic Writing Now (AWN): Ch. 1, “Academic Writing: An Overview,” pp. 23-26
T, 9/1 In-class:
NYC culture via film
Writing as a process; writing for a product
Academic paper; student professionalism
*Peter Elbow, “Freewriting”
*Writing about Movies (WAM): Ch. 1, “Challenges of Writing about Movies”
Due:
Seymour Chatman, “What Novels Can Do that Films Can’t ...”
WAM: Ch. 2, “Writing about Movies”
WAM: Ch. 3, Analyzing Film
Film Analysis: Intro., “Text and Context” & “Film Analysis”
Th, 9/3 In-class:
Discuss essay one assignment
Motive
Seinfeld
Friends
How I Met Your Mother
Due:
White, “Here is New York”
AWN: Ch. 4, “Arguments and Organization,” pp. 69-79
AWN: Ch. 6, “Introduction,” pp. 103-112
AWN: Ch. 7, “Body Paragraphs, ” pp. 115-118

From Hilary Ashton’s (hashton@qc.cuny.edu)  “Writing (About) Rock Music” : 

Week 1
Mon 2/1 Introductions to each other and to the course; syllabus & assignments; class constitution; handouts; annotation and "Dancing About Architecture"; notebooks & reflection draft
Weds 2/3 Some Background: "Another Boring Day in Paradise: Rock and Roll and the Empowerment of Everyday Life" (Grossberg) and "Intersectionality 101" (Hankivsky).

Thesis statements and intro paragraphs.

First response due ⅔

Week 2
Mon 2/8 Birth of Rock: "Damn Cold in February" (Tevis), "Microaggressions: More than Just Race" (Wing Sue), and "Microaggressions with Dr. Chester Pierce" (from 20-min mark).

Listen: "That'll Be the Day" (Buddy Holly), "American Pie" (Don McLean)

Discussion groups and collaborative rubric.
Weds 2/10 Appropriation and Homage: "In the Jungle" (Malan), and "'She Told Me What to Say': The Beatles and Girl‐Group Discourse" (Bradby) [Group 1]

Listen: "The Lion Sleeps Tonight" (The Tokens), "Wimoweh" (The Weavers), "She
Loves You" (The Beatles)

Supporting paragraphs and contextualizing quotes. 
Sample Syllabus

Queens College, semester, year
ENG 110: College Writing (Section     )
Topic: Higher Education, “The University and You”
Days, Time, Room #

Instructor:
Office hours: 
Office location: Klapper Hall XXX
Office phone: (718) 997-XXXX
Email address:

Course blog URL:

Course Description: Our guiding assumption in this course is that higher education functions through a series of relationships, and that exploring them through writing will help us to contextualize the way we understand higher education in America as well as personal college experience. We can think of these relationships in different clusters or “frames”: as conversations between students, their families, and their teachers; between faculty and administrators; and between universities and the racial, ethnic, and geographical communities from which they draw. Through a progression of formal and informal writing assignments, we will contribute our voices to these conversations. One of the clearest ways that we can begin to understand what drives these conversations is to read and write about them in the context of the institution of which we are all a part: The City University of New York (CUNY). The process of observation, argument, evaluation, and revision that has driven changes in educational policy at CUNY is the same process that you will engage with as you participate in the interchange of ideas and information through your writing in this class. We will also explore the series of choices and circumstances that led to your decision to come to CUNY. What will be your relationship to this institution? How do your reasons for coming to college compare to generations of students who preceded you? How do your values converge with or diverge from the values of your university? 


Learning Objectives: By the end of the semester students will be able to

1) assess rhetorical context across different genres—evaluating them in terms of tone, stance, purpose, audience and visual design— and understand how this context works with ideas to produce the meaning of a text.
2) incorporate various methods of research into their written texts, including the use of secondary resources (both print and multimedia) and primary sources they have gathered themselves.
3) develop a vocabulary that will help them to analyze the structure and style of their writing, applying critical reading skills to their own texts and then articulating strategies for improvement.
4) make connections with other courses in terms of both content and methods of critical inquiry.

Required texts

They Say, I Say, 2nd ed., Graff  & Birkenstein, WW Norton
ISBN: 9780393933611 / Retail Price: $17

Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes, Emerson & Fretz, University of Chicago Press
ISBN: 978-0226206813 / Retail Price: $17.50

A course packet is available for purchase at Queens Copy Center on Kissena Blvd. (below Gino’s Pizzeria). This packet is required and must be purchased as soon as possible. The cost is $19.

Required materials
A lined notebook with sheets that can be torn out
A sturdy portfolio folder with multiple pockets for handouts
A reliable recording device (to collect data for your ethnographic research paper)
A mini-stapler (Please attach all work before turning it in!)
Consistent access to a working computer with a reliable internet connection and a printer


Assignments
As soon as you complete an essay, upload it to your personal blog. You will be reading from each others’ blogs on days when we have in-class writing workshops. When you turn in the final version of your paper (on the class following the writing workshop), you must hand me a hard copy. Then, upload the final version to your blog as well. As all of our assignments use secondary sources, a works cited page is required with every essay.

Assignment #1: “They Say” 
Format: Five-six pages. Deadline: 
Summarize the positions that Hirsch, Macedo and Loewen take on the issue of what students should learn in school. After discussing how their positions compare to and differ from one another, analyze an elementary or secondary school experience of your own that will allow you to “put in your oar” and explain your beliefs about how students should be taught history in school.  No direct quotations may be used in this paper. 

Assignment #2: As They Put It 
Format: Five-six pages. Deadline:
Choose one educational policy that you want to learn more about (“No Child Left Behind,” remediation, or affirmative action) as the focus for this essay. Quoting from various sources (those we have discussed in class and some that you find on your own), create a transcript of a debate between two fictitious individuals who are attempting to persuade the other of their opinion about this policy by citing relevant, reliable sources. 

Assignment #3: Saying Why It Matters 
Format: Five-six pages, plus Works Cited page. Deadline:
Write a letter to the Queens College Provost James Stellar inspired by the readings in this unit (“Education in America: The Next Generation”) that you have completed over the past two weeks. Your letter should present an argument that responds to the following prompt: How can Queens College offer an academic experience that is best suited to students of your generation? Describe two to three specific reforms that would make the Queens College experience more accessible and useful to you and your contemporaries. Finally, explain what the increasingly popular “corporate model” of schooling has to offer your generation of college students. 

Assignment #4: From the Inside Out: An Ethnography
Format: Eight-ten pages (final write-up). Deadlines: The stages and due dates of this sequence of assignments will be discussed in further detail as we progress.
An ethnography is a study of human social phenomena and social communities through the use of fieldwork (first-hand observation). To conclude this course, you will choose a group of people who have a stake in “higher education” (students, teachers, parents, etc.) and follow them closely for three to four weeks to record their beliefs, understandings, and social interactions in order to learn more about some debate in higher education and make an argument based on your conclusions. From initial proposal to bibliography to fieldwork to memos to final write-up, this project will be completed in stages. The first step is choosing your group; it is never too early to start thinking about the group or issue you want to study!  Feel free to approach me about this at any time.

Other Key Course Requirements 

1) Obtain access to the course blog (http://): Selected readings as well as announcements and assignments will be posted on this course blog. If you have never visited http://qwriting.org/ please visit the site and create a username and password. This will give you access to our class blog. 

2) Keep up with required writing assignments on your personal blog: Once you have signed up for a Qwriting,org account at http://qwriting.org/, you will be able to create a personal blog for use in this course this semester. The blog is yours forever. Treat it well and organize it clearly: make sure there is a page labeled “Weekly Assignments” and a section labeled “Essays.” (Other than that, you’re free to design it as you wish.) At the end of this semester, you may want to continue to add to it or adapt it for another purpose. Once you have created your own blog, this blog will be added to the “blog roll” for our course and will be open to the other members of the course and to me. This is not a private blog and should not be treated as such. The blog is a space for you to respond to the assignments on the syllabus and to develop your own relationship with the course material. Weekly blog posts will usually be about 300-400 words (please include a word count at the end of your post each week).  Your response to the weekly material must by posted by 9 p.m. every Sunday. Posting after the deadline will result in a deduction of points from your final course grade. 

3) Turn in polished hard copies of all four required essays. After you post your completed essays on your blog on the due date, these essays will be revised to display your most polished, sophisticated work. On the class following a writing workshop, hard copies of all revised papers must be turned in for a grade on the dates indicated on the schedule (then you can upload this final version to the blog as well). If you expect a grade on the assignment, both the electronic version and the hard copy must be submitted by the required due dates.  The lack of either will severely lower the assignment grade.  

4) Participation and engagement with the required recitation hour. 

Grading
Essay #1 (15 points)
Essay #2 (15 points)
Essay #3 (15 points)
Ethnographic research paper (25 points)
Active contributor status (20 points) 
**Important note: You will receive 1 point for each day you are prepared for class (i.e. have completed the readings and necessary blog posts or writing assignments). If you are not prepared with the required work due on a particular day, even if you are physically present, you cannot earn a point for that class. These points cannot be made up after a class passes. If you know in advance that you are going to be absent, missing work must be submitted by the end of the day on which class was held. If you are present and prepared for every class this semester, you can earn up to three extra credit points in this category, which will go toward your final grade.
Recitation hour (10 points)

Your final grade is out of 100 points. 
90-100 = A-/A   80-89 = B-/B/B+  70-79 = C-/C/C+  60-69 = D  Below 60 = F

Course Policies and Resources
Avoid plagiarism: Plagiarism is the act of presenting another person’s ideas, research or writings as your own. The following are all examples of plagiarism (though this is not an all-inclusive list):
Copying another person’s actual words without the use of quotation marks and footnotes
attributing the words to their source.
Presenting another person’s ideas or theories in your own words without acknowledging the source.
Using information that is not common knowledge without acknowledging the source.
Failing to acknowledge collaborators on homework assignments.
Internet plagiarism includes submitting downloaded term papers or parts of term papers,
paraphrasing or copying information from the internet without citing the source, and “cutting & pasting” from various sources without proper attribution. (http://web.cuny.edu/academics/info-central/policies/academic-integrity.pdf/)

Plagiarizing material on a paper in this course is grounds for failing that assignment. A second offense is grounds for failing the course. If you have any questions about what constitutes plagiarism, please ask me before an assignment is due. If I find that you have plagiarized, I am required to fill out the incident report and submit it to a college administrator.

Become an Active Contributor: You are a college student and an adult. Please take those roles seriously. You are expected to be respectful to me and the rest of the group, which includes coming prepared to class, contributing to class discussions in a thoughtful and consistent way, and keeping abreast of any necessary changes in scheduling or course requirements. 

	Tips for Becoming/Remaining an Active Contributor:

Bring all necessary course materials to class every day, especially the required readings.
Complete required assignments fully and on time. Be sure you updating your blog multiple times per week and checking in with our course blog regularly. 
Ask a question when you encounter material in the reading that you do not understand. (Someone else probably has the same question.)
Ask a question as soon as I have said something that you do not understand or request that I repeat myself.
Do not wait for me to call on you to raise your hand!

What does it mean to be enrolled in a “linked” course? The English 110 section is “linked” with Sociology 101 because the courses share some similar themes and, at times, you may see direct connections between discussions in both classes. You cannot drop one linked course without dropping the other.
The Writing Center: Located in Kiely Hall 229, tutors there are trained to help you revise your writing at various stages. If you believe you need additional help with your writing, or if I ask you to set up a regular meeting with a tutor, you should make an appointment at least one week prior to when an assignment is due. You can also get online help by visiting their website at http://qcpages.qc.edu/qcwsw/. 
Special Accommodations: If you have a learning, sensory, or physical reason for special accommodation in this class, contact the Office of Special Services in 171 Kiely Hall at 718-997-5870 and please inform me.
Semester Schedule
*Note: For first three units, readings are in They Say, I Say and the course packet unless otherwise noted. Readings and assignments are subject to change. Students will be notified of any changes in class and/or via the course blog.






Date

Assignments (due on the day next to which they are listed)
Unit 1
What (and How) Should Students Learn in School?
Mon, Aug 30
Introduction to the course: “putting in your oar”
Stephen Colbert on Higher Education 
“Social Class and the Hidden Curriculum of Work” (handout)
Introduction to They Say, I Say (handout)
FYI survey
Set up your personal blog!
Wed, Sept 1


Reading: Complete “Social Class and the Hidden Curriculum of Work” (handout) and Introduction to TSIS 
Writing: How would Jean Anyon classify your elementary school? Provide an anecdote from your experience in school to illustrate the category you have chosen (300-400 words)
Mon, Sept 6
COLLEGE CLOSED
Wed, Sept 8
No classes scheduled for classes that end after 4 p.m.
Mon, Sept 13
Reading: Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to Know, Preface and Chapter 1, “Literacy and Cultural Literacy” and TSIS, Chapters 1 “and 2
Writing: Following the advice in chapter 2 of TSIS, summarize Hirsch’s argument about “cultural literacy” in about 300-400 words. 
Wed, Sept 15
Introduction to Essay #1
Reading: Literacies of Power, Chapter 2, “Our Common Culture: A Poisonous Pedagogy”
Writing: Following the advice in chapter 2 of TSIS, summarize Macedo’s argument about “poisonous pedagogy” in about 300-400 words.
Mon, Sept 20
Reading: Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American History Textbook Got Wrong, Chapters 5 and 6
Writing: Respond to prompt on course blog
Wed, Sept 22
Essay #1 due today (post on blog) 
Writing workshop in computer lab (Room TBA)
Unit 2
Who Else is Making Decisions about Your Education?
Mon, Sept 27
Reading: Why School?, Chapter 3, “No Child Left Behind and the Spirit of Democratic Education” and TSIS, Chapter 3, “As He Himself Puts It”
Writing: Revised copy of essay #1 due (turn in hard copy and post on blog)
Wed, Sept 29
Introduction to Essay #2
Reading: “Class Warrior” (posted on course blog) and TSIS, Chapter 4, “Yes/No/Okay, But”
Writing: Respond to prompt posted on blog
Mon, Oct 4
 Reading Why School?, Chapters 9 and 10, “Remediation at the University” and “Re-mediating Remediation” and TSIS, Chapter 6, “Skeptics May Object”
Writing: Respond to prompt posted on blog
Wed, Oct 6
Ending Affirmative Action, Chapter 4, “Remediation and Diversity: Affirmative Action in Higher Education”
Writing: Respond to prompt posted on blog
Mon, Oct 11
COLLEGE CLOSED
Wed, Oct 13
Essay #2 due (post on blog) 
Writing workshop in computer lab (Room TBA)
Unit 3
Education in America: The Next Generation 
Mon, Oct 18

Introduction to Essay #3
Reading: “Drive Thru U” (in course packet) and “Phoenix Risen” (on course blog) and TSIS, Chapter 7, “So What? Who Cares?” 
Writing: Revised copy of essay #2 due (turn in hard copy and post on blog)
Wed, Oct 20
 Reading: “Homeless at College,” “Scapegoating For-Profit Colleges,” “Who Profits? Who Learns?” “Subprime Colleges, Revisited” (readings on course blog) and TSIS, Chapter 8, “As a Result”
Writing: Respond to prompt posted on course blog
Mon, Oct 25
Generation Me, Chapter 2, “An Army of One: Me” and TSIS, Chapter 9, “Ain’t So/Is Not”
Writing: Respond to prompt posted on course blog
Wed, Oct 27
Generation Me , Chapter 3, “You Can be Anything You Want to Be” and TSIS, Chapter 10, “But Don’t Get Me Wrong”
Writing: Respond to prompt posted on course blog
Mon, Nov 1
Essay #3 due (post on blog)
Writing workshop in computer lab (Room TBA)
Unit 4
Going into the Field: Ethnographic Inquiry as a Tool for Understanding the Beliefs, Habits and Social Lives of Students
Wed, Nov 3
Introduction: What is Ethnography and How Can We Use It?
Reading: Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes, Chapter 1, “Fieldnotes in Ethnographic Research”
Writing: Revised version of essay #3 due (turn in hard copy and post on blog)
Mon, Nov 8
Reading: Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes, Chapter 2, “In the Field: Participating, Observing and Jotting Notes”
Writing: Choose THREE places where you know that groups of college students (or faculty or administrators) congregate and where people might be engaged in an activity and/or discussion that relates to any aspect of “higher education” we have discussed this semester. Go to each place and observe the scene in front of you for at least 30 minutes before moving on. Practice jottings at each location as they are described in chapter 2 and post the jottings on your blog.
Wed, Nov 10
Reading: Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes, Chapter 3, “Writing Up Fieldnotes I”
Writing: Follow up with the most interesting and informative scene of the three you observed last time. Observe this one location/group for about an hour. Collect jottings. Turn your jottings into fieldnotes as per the advice in chapter 3.
Mon, Nov 15
Reading: Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes, Chapter 3, “Writing Up Fieldnotes I”
Writing: Create a proposal of about 500 words about the type of educational scenario you would like to explore in depth in the field. Explain why it seems important to learn more about this scenario and how you will collect your data.
Wed, Nov 17
Library session (Room TBA)
Mon, Nov 22
Reading: Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes, Chapter 4, “Writing Up Fieldnotes II”
Writing: Create an annotated bibliography that includes at least two scholarly sources you found about your educational scenario in the library. 
Wed, Nov 24
Reading:  Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes, Chapter 5, “Pursuing Members’ Meanings”
Writing: After going into the field to observe your educational scenario one more time, post another set of fieldnotes on your blog.
Mon, Nov 29
Reading:  Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes, Chapter 6, “Processing Fieldnotes: Coding and Memoing”
Writing: Based on the sample conceptual memo and following the advice in chapter 6, create a conceptual memo.
Wed, Dec 1
Reading:  Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes, Chapter 7, “Writing an Ethnography”
Writing workshop (Room TBA)
Mon, Dec 6
Writing workshop (Room TBA)
Wed, Dec 8
Writing workshop (Room TBA)
Mon, Dec 13
(last class)
Final writing workshop (Room TBA)
Writing: Review the work you have posted on your blog over the course of the semester and, as your final post, write a reflective letter (addressing me and the rest of the class) about the ways you have changed as a writer (and as a college student generally) this semester. 
Tues, Dec 14 - Tues. Dec. 21st

EXAM WEEK, final ethnographic research papers due  




Other important dates: 
September 16th begins unevaluated withdrawal period

On the conference hour:
English 110 includes a weekly conference hour that is scheduled for half an hour after every class meeting. Each student will sign up for one of five writing groups that will meet with me every three weeks. During these conferences, we will talk specifically about your writing practices, class assignments, and the writing and research process. We will look closely at one another’s work during this time. You will need to read each group member’s writing in advance of the meetings. 

This is a time for more individualized instruction and attendance is required. The conference hour part of the class is 10% of your grade and you receive credit through attendance and engaged participation. No make-ups are allowed. 

Calendar for conference hour meetings

8/30: full class workshop
9/13: Group A
9/15: Group B

9/20: Group C
9/22: Group D

9/27: Group E
9/29: Group A

10/4: Group B
10/6: Group C

10/11: college closed
10/13: Group D

10/18: Group E
10/20: Group A

10/25: Group B
10/27: Group C




11/1: Group D
11/3: Group E

11/8: Group A
11/10: Group B

11/15: Group C
11/17: Group B

11/22: Group D
11/24: Group E

11/29: Group A
12/1: full class on research paper

12/6: Group B
12/8: Group C

12/13: Group D
12/15: Group E



























Teaching Resources
The First Few Days
The Syllabus

On the first day of class, along with becoming acquainted with your students, you will distribute a syllabus that should include a schedule for the course (major topics/assignments/deadlines) as well as the course policies.  The course policies cover a wide array of important topics, including your contact information, office hours, and procedures regarding late, missed, or uncompleted work.  You should also include information about policies regarding academic honesty, respectful and non-discriminatory class discussion and accommodations for disabilities.

A clear and forceful explanation of these policies during the first day of class will help your students understand what you expect of them.  In discussing these policies, there are a few ground rules that you might want to place particular emphasis on:

Class Attendance: There are some general restrictions on how absences may affect a student’s grade.  Queens College does not have an attendance policy, and you cannot write in your syllabus that students will fail your course if they miss X number of classes. However, we do recommend that you have a participation policy, and you can tell students that poor attendance will reflect on their participation grade. If you think that a student has missed too many classes and thus missed a significant amount of in-class assignments, you can decide to fail the student on that basis. 

Instructors are encouraged to make their grading policies performance-based, so that absences affect the grade only insofar as participation, in-class exercises, and other activities are missed.  Under such a policy, you need only decide what criteria you will use to determine a student’s eligibility for makeup work. 

You need to make any policy about absences and lateness clear to students on your syllabus.  You should also make it clear whether your policy distinguishes between excused and unexcused absences.  If you do excuse absences, be sure that you have a clear policy for what gets excused and that you consistently implement that policy as stated.  In addition, maintain detailed and accurate records that reflect these policies.

Email: Because most new students have technologically integrated lives, it might be helpful, then, to articulate your views concerning email and its appropriate uses in conjunction with your course.  How often do you check/respond to email?  How do you expect email to be written (formal/informal)?  Will student work be accepted over email?  Conversely, if you intend to use email announcements/reminders/addendums to class time, you might also consider requesting information about your students’ familiarity with and access to the necessary technology.

Late work: In conjunction with the previous two topics, you will want to make sure that you have a set policy concerning late work.  Specify what assignments may be accepted late and what the penalty will be assigned to that work. You may also wish to outline particular policies about where and when work should be submitted.  For example, if a student misses class, is your mailbox or email an acceptable alternative?

Recitation Hour: Your syllabus should state the plan and the policy for the recitation hour, which is discussed in more detail on pp. 35.


A Checklist for the First Week of Class

Before the first day of class:
1. Prepare a syllabus.  The syllabus should tell students the approximate due dates of the formal writing assignments (including graded elements of the research project) as well as conference dates when class will be canceled.  The first weeks of work leading to the first major writing assignment should be spelled out in detail, so that students can schedule time for the reading and writing work you expect them to do.
2. Once you have your teaching assignment, you might want to visit the room(s) in which you will teach if you’re in town.  Get a feel for the room: you may find it reassuring to picture the room, checking whether there is space for you to walk around, if there is ample blackboard space, and whether there is a pull-down screen for powerpoint presentations (and where the electrical outlet is located). 
3. Print your roster from CUNYFirst (information on accessing CUNYFirst can be found in Appendix I: Computing on Campus). If you have time, practice saying the names aloud.  A word of caution is in order here: Students may add and drop classes for three weeks after classes begin.  The roster you start with is not likely to be your final.  This is especially common during the spring semester.  Therefore, you will want to be on the alert for new students at the beginning of each class.  Some of these may not be enrolled in your section (ask them!), and may beg for an over-tally enrolling them in your class. You must refuse these requests; the 20 students you are charged with teaching demand enough of you already, and 20 students is the Queens College limit for English 110. 
4. Plan a class activity that gives students a preview of the work they’ll be doing in class. This could involve a short reading to analyze or some short writing.
5. Plan your first classes in detail.  Draft and start revising the writing assignment for the first paper.  Set clear learning goals, plan a variety of activities, and decide on the order of these activities for each day.  

A note about photocopying and filing syllabi: The English Department copy machines are swamped at the beginning of each semester.  Therefore, the sooner you complete your syllabus and policy sheets for copying, the better.  Since some students will add your class while others drop it, make a couple of extra copies. In order to make copies, you need to obtain a copy code from the English department – ask the English department main office personnel for this code. Copies of all syllabi need to on file in the English department; the Associate Chair Roger Sedarat (roger.sedarat@qc.cuny.edu) will email you just before classes start to ask for an electronic copy of your syllabi. It’s important that you respond to this request immediately. 

During the first week of classes:
1. Prepare an “icebreaker” for the first day, so students can begin to learn each other’s names and become accustomed to each other and to speaking in class.  Even experienced instructors find they have some nervousness on the first day of class, but it’s worthwhile to remember that students are often apprehensive as well.  You can deflect whatever nervousness you may feel, and help students gain a measure of comfort in your class, by devising plenty of activities encouraging active student participation. Ideally, these ice breakers will give students a preview of the kinds of activities they might do or the ideas they might explore in your class. Some ideas are: playing a name game to get all the students familiar with each other and you, discussing what college writing looks like and how it differs from the writing they did in high school (it can be very interesting to hear their perspective on the writing they did in high school, and how they feel about writing in general), assigning a short writing exercise that each student then shares by reading aloud, and having them read a few short texts and then discussing them in groups.  
2. Review your policies and forecast your syllabus on the first day of class.  Allow time for questions, encourage students to review them later, and give them the opportunity to ask further questions about your policies and syllabus on succeeding days.
3. Remind students to buy the necessary books/course packets required for your course or to gain access to Qwriting or Blackboard if you are distributing the readings electronically.  Be aware that students are often awaiting loan checks or other forms of financial aid during the first week of school and/or may delay purchasing books until their schedules are entirely set.  You might consider allowing extra time for the first reading assignment and/or putting the necessary reading on reserve in the library.
4. Distribute the first formal writing assignment no later than the third class session.  As with all writing assignments, be sure to review your expectations for this assignment in class.  Give students a chance to ask questions about the assignment, to discuss its requirements and component tasks, and maybe even to write about some aspect of the assignment.

The Diagnostic Essay

You might choose to give a diagnostic essay, which is a short, preliminary writing assignment that is generally given within the first week of the course and is not submitted for a grade.  The assignment allows you to become familiar with and provide feedback about the skill and style of your students’ writing at the beginning of the course. The diagnostic essay may be impromptu or the prompt may be given ahead of time; it may be given as an in-class writing or as a take-home assignment; it can stand on its own or may be used as a sort of pre-writing exercise for a later, larger assignment.  It might be an academic essay, asking students to respond briefly to a class reading of some sort, or it could be something reflective: a detailed letter to you about their expectations for the course, for example.
The mention of a “timed writing” might cause your students some anxiety, so it’s generally a good idea to give them a full explanation of the purpose and procedure for the assignment a class or two in advance.  Once these assignments have been submitted, you should also review them for signs that a student has been misplaced in your course.  If a writing sample suggests that a student is placed in your course inappropriately, please show a copy of the sample to one of the directors of First Year Writing at once. Instructors should retain copies of the diagnostic as a sample of each student’s written work.  

Classroom Planning

Classroom planning not only helps you define what you are going to deal with in class, but also helps you clarify how you want to convey this material.  The following heuristic may help you prepare for class:
What do I expect the students to have learned by the end of the class hour?  What am I presenting today?  Putting these two questions next to each other helps us remember that the point of any activity is to enable student learning.  It’s a good idea to set specific and attainable goals.  To expect students to understand the difference between paraphrasing and summarizing a source after a class session is more realistic than expecting them to fully comprehend the Toulmin system of argument analysis after a fifteen-minute presentation.
How do I plan to go about presenting today’s material?  Which methods of presentation will I use?  Pedagogical staples discussed below include lecture, short writing exercises, class discussion, and group work.
What are my alternatives if one of my plans falls flat?  This question is especially pertinent if you anticipate spending substantial time on discussion of a reading.  If students are not prepared to discuss an article, be ready to turn that session into a collaborative reading exercise.
Do method and material combine into a fruitful learning process?  Straightforward how-to instruction, followed by student practice, makes more sense as a vehicle for some course material (the conventions of MLA citation style, for example) than discussion.  Conversely, students may learn less from a lecture on an assigned reading than they will from wrestling with the reading themselves in discussion and small-group work.
How much time do I want to spend on each section?  It’s not always easy, but you should keep track of the clock when you teach.  Try to find a balance between allowing for student response (and possible digressions) and meeting your goals for the day.
How does this particular class fit into the structure of the semester?  Students want and need to understand how one day’s lesson follows from the preceding class and leads into the next.  They also need to understand how the day’s work will help them with their current writing assignment.
Especially in the first few weeks of the semester, it makes very good sense to plan a few extra minutes of activities for each day.  Dismissing class twenty minutes early, because an activity didn’t work or everything you planned took less time than you anticipated, can be embarrassing, and it may cost a measure of good will from your students.  If you prepare more activities than you actually use, you’ll build up a file you can plunder later, and you’ll avoid any student perception that you’re underprepared.
While planning your class, you may want to break up your class period into short segments.  As you create an “agenda” for the day, try to provide a variety of activities (which in turn helps students remain alert).  Here is a sample class plan for a 75-minute Tuesday-Thursday class:
5 minutes: Lay out the agenda for the day to your students (this may sound self-explanatory to you, but it is crucial for the students’ understanding of the course as a whole); if possible, explain how today’s lesson relates to previous and/or future work; collect homework; use the blackboard to assign homework and/or outline the day’s agenda.  If you can, come to class a bit early: this is the time when some of your students will approach you with questions.
5-10 minutes: Assign a writing exercise; have the students respond to a question on the material they have read for today.
20 minutes: Lead a discussion on an assigned reading.
10 minutes: Present a mini-lecture about new rhetorical material.
15 minutes: Assign an exercise in conjunction with this new material.
5 minutes: Explain a new writing assignment. 
5-10 minutes: Ask students to sketch out a plan for meeting the goals set by the new assignment.
5-10 minutes: Ask students to work in pairs, sharing and explaining the approaches they’ve sketched.
5 minutes: Synthesize (have students summarize what has happened in class today, or summarize class material in closing mini-lecture).
As you can see, the above plan imagines that activities might take anywhere from 75 to 90 minutes.  If earlier activities run long, the next class can start with the activities devoted to exploring and discussing the tasks of the new writing assignment.
We help our students use the work that they do one day to help them the next day by making connections between activities. For example, in the above plan the instructor’s presentation of new rhetorical material could refer to the just-discussed reading for examples, and the following writing exercise might ask students to examine in detail how one of these examples operates.
Lesson Plan Template
Lesson Plan on X
Faculty Name, College or University, Department
Course


Lesson objective(s):  

Total estimated time: 

Additional outcome(s): 

Course work or assignment underway: 

Work and/or reading completed before class: 

Sequence of Classroom Activities

Reflection on the lesson’s success or alternative approaches: 


How Will the Recitation Hour Work?

Historically, sections of ENG 110 have met twice a week for blocks of one hour and fifty minutes—just as they do now.  But that apparent stability masks a new development: the introduction of the “recitation hour” that is mandated by Pathways.  We’ve negotiated it to create a practice that suits our pedagogical goals for ENG 110, and this is how it works.

Every class period will functionally end thirty minutes before the stated end time, and you’ll spend that time meeting with your students in some configuration of small groups or conferences. So, let’s say that your class meets on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 12:10-2:00.  You’ll have a regular class period from 12:10-1:30.  Then, you’ll let some portion of the students leave while you meet with the rest in some kind of workshop or conference.
The one requirement we receive from CUNY Central is that the entire class can’t stay for the entire 30 minutes every time.   Beyond that, each of us has to ask ourselves how we can maximize that time with our students. Below are some potential configurations for the conference hour.  
Conference Hour, Option A1

English 110 includes a weekly conference hour that is scheduled for half an hour after every class meeting. 10% of your final grade is based on your active, engaged participation in these conferences. During these conferences we will improve specific elements of academic writing. You should plan to attend one conference per week. After reviewing the schedule below, sign up for the conferences you will attend on the Google conference scheduling spreadsheet (the link is here and on the course website). Switching conferences at the last minute will be a real headache, so please be courteous and make every effort to keep to the initial schedule.
W 8/28: 1st day : Building a Writing Community*

M 9/2: No class 
W 9/4: No class

M 9/9: Thesis 
W 9/11: Thesis 

M 9/16 : Evidence
W 9/18 : Evidence

M 9/23 : Style
W 9/25 : Style

M 9/30 : Peer Review
W 10/2 : Peer Review

M 10/7 : Revision
W 10/9 : Revision

M 10/14: No class
W 10/16 : Cover letters*

M 10/21 : MLA format
W 10/23 : MLA format

M 10/28 : Grammar
W 10/30 : Grammar

M 11/4 : Citing Sources
W 11/6 : Citing Sources

M 11/11 : Peer Review
W 11/13 : Peer Review

M 11/18 : Revision
W 11/20 : Revision

M 11/25 : Work plans*
W 11/27: Fri sched

M 12/2 : Stitching
W 12/4 : Stitching

M 12/9 : Cover letters
W 12/11: last day : Cover letters


Conference Hour, Option A2

Attendance at these conferences is required. 10% of your final grade is based on your active, engaged participation in these conferences. During these conferences we will improve specific elements of academic writing. You should plan to attend one conference per week. At the start of each week I will hand out/post to the course website a sign-up sheet so you can tell me which conference you will attend that week.
W 8/28: 1st day : Building a Writing Community*

M 9/2: No class 
W 9/4: No class

M 9/9: Thesis 
W 9/11: Thesis 

M 9/16 : Evidence
W 9/18 : Evidence

M 9/23 : Style
W 9/25 : Style

M 9/30 : Peer Review
W 10/2 : Peer Review

M 10/7 : Revision
W 10/9 : Revision

M 10/14: No class
W 10/16 : Cover letters*

M 10/21 : MLA format
W 10/23 : MLA format

M 10/28 : Grammar
W 10/30 : Grammar

M 11/4 : Citing Sources
W 11/6 : Citing Sources

M 11/11 : Peer Review
W 11/13 : Peer Review

M 11/18 : Revision
W 11/20 : Revision

M 11/25 : Work plans*
W 11/27: Fri sched

M 12/2 : Stitching
W 12/4 : Stitching

M 12/9 : Cover letters
W 12/11: last day : Cover letters

Conference Hour, Option B (differentiated conferences)
English 110 includes a weekly conference hour that is scheduled for half an hour after every class meeting. 10% of your final grade is based on your active, engaged participation in these conferences. During these conferences we will improve specific elements of academic writing. Each student will be assigned 6 skill-building conferences that he or she must attend (in addition to starred conferences, which everyone attends). After an initial assessment, I’ll assign groups for conferences based on which ones I think will benefit you the most. Over the course of the semester, as I get to know your writing strengths and challenges better, I may change the groups I ask you to attend, so keep these time slots available.
Th 8/29 : Building a Writing Community*

T 9/3 : Assessment*
Th 9/5: No class

T 9/10: Grammar
Th 9/12: Style

T 9/17: Thesis I
Th 9/19: Thesis II

T 9/24: Academic style I
Th 9/26: Academic style II

T 10/1: Essay structure
Th 10/3: Paragraph structure

T 10/8: Sentence structure
Th 10/10: Active verbs

T 10/15: Mon sched
Th 10/17: Citing Sources I

T 10/22: Citing Sources II
Th 10/24: Analysis I

T 10/29: Analysis II
Th 10/31: Grammar I

T 11/5: Grammar II
Th 11/7: Stitching I

T 11/12: Stitching II
Th 11/14: Introductions

T 11/19: Conclusions
Th 11/21: Concise language

T 11/26: MLA formatting*
Th 11/28: no class

T 12/3: Finding sources
Th 12/5: Managing sources

T 12/10: Skill retention I

Th 12/12, last day: Skill retention II

Conference hour, Option C
English 110 includes a weekly conference hour that is scheduled for half an hour after every class meeting. Each student will sign up for one of five writing groups that will meet with me every three weeks. During these conferences, we will talk specifically about your writing practices, class assignments, and the writing and research process. We will look closely at one another’s work during this time. You will need to read each group member’s writing in advance of the meetings. 

This is a time for more individualized instruction and attendance is required. The conference hour part of the class is 10% of your grade and you receive credit through attendance and engaged participation. No make-ups are allowed. 

Calendar for conference hour meetings

9/28: full class workshop
9/9: Group A
9/11: Group B

9/16: Group C
9/18: Group D

9/23: Group E
9/25: Group A

9/30: Group B
10/2: Group C

10/7: Group D
10/9: Group E

10/14: no class
10/16: Group A

10/21: Group B
10/23: Group





10/28: Group D
10/30: Group E

11/4: Group A
11/6: Group B

11/11: Group C
11/13: Group B

11/18: Group D
11/20: Group E

11/25: Group A

12/2: Group B
12/4: Group C

12/9: Group D
12/11: Group E
Teaching Methods

Discussion

Discussions involve students in dialogue not only with you, but also with each other and with the text or materials at hand.  Many of us find that discussions are more productive as students learn to speak to each other, rather than directing each response to the instructor with the hope of gaining approval.  Ideally, discussions provide your students with an opportunity to test their thoughts on a diverse audience, which in turn gives them feedback.  This aim is more likely to be attained if all participants respect the necessity of speaking with clarity, specificity, and respect for others.
A.  Preparation and questions
Both you and the students need to be prepared for a discussion.  Your task lies mainly in thinking of good discussion questions and being an efficient moderator.
What, then, is a good question?  Instructors quickly learn that broad questions leading to a yes or no answer are rarely productive.  In particular, we learn not to lead with our chins by asking students whether they liked an assigned reading.  A negative response casts a disheartening pall over the classroom, and a positive response is scarcely more valuable, since the class is unlikely to be able to account for its evaluation with informed detail.  Some general suggestions:

1. As you devise questions, anticipate likely student responses to them, and then think about how you can build on these responses to further the discussion. Remember that your students will consider you the authority in the room, so they will listen carefully for signs that you think they’re “right” or “wrong.” With that in mind, you might use your responses strategically to deepen their analyses­—focusing on the intellectual question at hand rather than the right/wrongness of an individual person.  At the same time, don’t hesitate to celebrate a comment that is particularly interesting or impressive to you, and to use it as a model or spur for further inquiry.
2. Think in advance about how to sequence your questions, moving from the simple to the complex, from the concrete to the abstract.  One might start discussion of a reading, for example, by asking verifiable questions about its content (Where and what is the thesis?  What is the first major line of support for this claim?), then move to questions about its rhetorical strategies (What is the effect of delaying rebuttal to the very end?  What would have been the effect of offering rebuttal at once, as the last text we read did?), then ask students to identify and test the argument’s assumptions, and conclude by asking about its implications or potential applications (if we accept the author’s argument, what should we be doing in response to X)?  Good questions sometimes fail to elicit response because they are asked too soon, before students have built up a collective understanding of a reading’s structure and purpose.
Perhaps the most challenging part of leading a discussion is getting it started; once a discussion gets rolling, it’s usually relatively easy to maintain its momentum.  It makes sense, therefore, to develop multiple points of entry into the reading to be discussed (thesis, claim/reason structure, key definitions, tone and diction, particularities of the introduction or conclusion, etc.) as you prepare a list of possible opening questions.  If students stumble on an opening question (e.g., What’s the thesis?), try backtracking to what they already know (e.g., Where do writers usually put thesis statements?) before moving to another entry question.  Phrasing questions is something of an art, and you learn it as you practice.  Short and specific questions that can be understood in a single hearing give students a better purchase on possible responses; questions that combine several concepts at once are hard to follow.  If you habitually rephrase questions in class, chances are that students will become confused and frustrated, so you may want to think about how to formulate your questions in advance.  Gordon Harvey’s “Elements of the Academic Essay” (see page 92 in Appendix IV) is a good document to hand out to students to familiarize them with the vocabulary we use in English 110 – thesis, motive, evidence, analysis, key terms, structure, tone, style – and can help with initiating discussion about a text.
3. Don’t be dismayed if, in the first weeks of the semester, student responses display a general, scanty, or distant understanding of an assigned reading, or if they respond with outright hostility to complex questions.  Few students, after all, will have had experience in reading the kinds of material we assign; few will recognize the value of taking notes as they read, or of rereading, unless we teach these practices.  Many will be inclined to skip passages they don’t immediately understand.  By featuring those passages, by inviting students to unpack complex ideas and demanding that they contend with the tough sentences, we do them a valuable service.  Don’t be afraid, then, to take the time to examine a single paragraph or passage in detail.  Time spent modeling the responses of an experienced reader while leading the class through a collaborative paraphrase of difficult material will be repaid in full later in the semester as students work through difficult sources in preparation for their research papers.
Although you may wish to rely on the reading assignments as the main source for discussion, you do not have to restrict yourself to these issues.  Campus, national, and international events may prove a good springboard for discussion.  Specific aspects of writing itself are always useful topics of discussion, and conversations in which students imagine and talk about ways to approach the current writing assignment can be extremely productive.

B.  Performance Guidelines for Instructors and Students
Teacher: As when you lecture, remind yourself to speak clearly and audibly, to vary your pace and rhythm, and to monitor student responses as you speak. Your students may be new to the rhetorical conventions that you use, and they may need help with vocabulary that seems common to you, but they are likely to be won over easily by clarity and willingness to provide explanations and rationales for class activities. 
A brief aside is warranted here: If you speak English that is accented in a way unfamiliar to New Yorkers, some of your students may express impatience at having to expend extra effort to understand you in class. The same is true if your students speak with an accent; many Queens College students are multilingual immigrants or second-generation Americans. Make it clear that English is inflected in many different ways by speakers from across the nation, not to mention the world, and that a world-class university education entails learning how to negotiate linguistic variety effectively.
Whatever your background may be, your students likely will be won over by enthusiastic, energetic leadership of discussions.  Student evaluations repeatedly show how much students appreciate their instructors’ enthusiasm.  By showing that you like what you’re doing, you model the response you seek from them; a teacher’s behavior is contagious.  If, through posture and comments, instructors communicate boredom and detachment, or show little interest in or respect for student responses, students will find little reason to participate in discussion. 
It is difficult to conduct an effective discussion while sitting behind a desk, so you will want to get up and move around the classroom.  By having your students follow you around with their eyes, you’ll help them remain alert.  Move toward your students as they speak, rather than backing away from them.  It’s important to listen to your students as they speak, and to show that you’re listening, rather than staring out a window or contemplating the blackboard.  You can safeguard against privileging any particular block of students by remembering to move around the room.  If space permits, consider walking to the back of the room on occasion—you and your students might enjoy the change in perspective. 
If your room allows for it, consider asking your students to sit in a circle for discussion.  In that way everyone can see everyone else, and no one can hide behind another person’s back.  More students are likely to contribute to discussion if arranged in a circle than when they are seated in rows.  Further, circular seating fosters direct address among students.
Try not to take what students do personally (for instance, if they deem your favorite essay or author boring or balk before a lesson plan that is brilliantly conceived), and never lose your temper during a discussion.  A sense of humor helps (but don’t try too hard to be funny); be open and accessible.  You can be flexible without being a push-over.  Don’t be too surprised if many of your students have not read the assignment the day after Thanksgiving break, or on the day when a paper assignment is due.  These can be good occasions for review of what has been accomplished, for forecast of what remains to be done, and for work on writing and revision.
The language we choose during discussions exerts a powerful influence on our students’ language and attitudes.  Sexist or any other kind of discriminatory language is prohibited by university policies; put more positively, as instructors we have the opportunity to model regard for all groups in our discourse.
Students:  Make it clear that you expect the students to listen to each other without interrupting and to engage productively with each other during class discussions.  If a student is particularly disruptive—and this is very seldom the case—talk to him or her individually.  Please remember that you do not have to put up with undisciplined behavior or any other obstacles which prevent the class and you from working comfortably.  Contact the Directors of First Year Writing for help if you need it.
Cultural dynamics of gender, race, and class will doubtless shape classroom discussion.  Studies of conversational style, for example, illustrate how gender figures in the pattern and content of turn-taking.  For example, if a student prefaces a turn with “This may sound stupid, but . . .,” this student may have no expectation of her contribution being doubted as inadequate.  Instead, she may be aiming to give needed ground to other speakers, to provide space for continued conversation.  Yet some auditors will understand such a speaker to be lacking in confidence, and will respond accordingly.  It is your job to recognize such subtle degrees of miscommunication and to intervene to keep discussion moving forward productively and humanely.  Whatever the dynamic in your classroom, try to insure that everyone has a chance to contribute and that no one feels threatened.  And be aware, of course, that student perception of your own gender, race, and social position will also affect student response.
Students understand the need to take notes during lectures, but they may need some prompting before they take notes during discussion.  Further, they may need some training in how to take notes while speaking and listening to others.  You can help them learn this skill by jotting responses on the blackboard as students speak, and occasionally making connections between these points (or, perhaps even better, asking students what connections or patterns they discern).  You can help students recognize the value of this skill by occasionally asking them, at the end of a discussion, to write a coherent paragraph-length synthesis of what was said.

C. Working with student responses and questions

Especially in the first weeks of the semester, students may be reluctant to speak up, and you may encounter a long silence in response to your first question or two.  Tempting as it is to answer the question yourself, you will help yourself and your students by waiting the silence out.  You can repeat the question, reassure them that you know they can answer the question, and offer other verbal and facial cues of encouragement—but you can also refuse to bail them out of their increasing discomfort as the seconds pass.  Once a brave soul or two volunteers a response, you can generally fan the first embers of response into a satisfactory blaze.  If two or three students dominate a discussion, you can gracefully acknowledge their contributions while bringing others into the discussion (e.g., “Vanessa and Tim and Shanika are doing all the work here, and it’s time to get other voices into the mix.  Jamie, what’s your take?”).  As you call on students by name, shy and passive students gain a point of entry.

Listen to your students’ answers without interrupting them.  When a student has finished talking, don’t simply repeat her answer, but do check with the rest of the class to make sure they have understood.  You can do this in an indirect way: “Rita, could you tell us how Tom’s point relates to Maxine Hong Kingston’s thesis?”

Acknowledge every answer you get, but don’t wildly nod in approval of everything you hear and lead the students into believing that every answer is the best one imaginable.  Neutralize the difference between excellent and adequate responses.  Show your students how to use every idea to move a conversation forward as you respond with encouragement that is also critical.  Remember what students say, and use their answers when appropriate—it is useful to make some notes after every class.  Especially at the beginning of the semester, students feel more at ease (and flattered) when you refer to their answer two or three classes later. 

As much as possible, encourage your students to ask questions.  Apart from asking “Are there any questions?” you can make your request more specific: “Does anyone have any questions about the historical context of Ladd’s?” Or, “As you read, were there any places where you felt confused or uncertain what the author meant, or why this point was relevant?”  Don’t just ask for student questions as an afterthought, or as a signal that class is over.  Make it clear that you are genuinely interested in their questions.  Students who are truly confused about an issue may not ask questions because they don’t know what questions to ask.  Try phrasing potential questions for them (“Do you think that Ladd favors a particular perspective on the Berlin Wall?  Are there dangers involved in refusing to endorse any of its significations?").  If you feel that students respond to your questions well enough but aren’t asking questions on their own, you can assign brief writing tasks (as homework, at the beginning of class, or even in the middle of a discussion) that ask them to generate questions posed by their reading and responses to the reading.
There are several ways to respond to student questions.  Where possible, you may want to help students answer the question themselves, perhaps by asking them to work through what prompted their question, or by reminding them of what they have learned earlier.  Such responses need to be couched in a friendly, non-threatening manner.  If students suspect that their questions may be turned into a cross-examination, they will stop asking them.

As an alternative, you may want to turn a student’s question over to the class or to set up a collegial debate between students who reach alternative conclusions about a text.  Doing so may help students realize that you are not the sole source of knowledge in the classroom, and may help foster a collaborative spirit of inquiry.  This response, too, requires some tact, since you don’t want students who ask questions to feel that their ignorance or lack of comprehension is on display.  
Finally, you may choose to answer the question yourself.  But if you are stumped by a factual question, never fake an answer or avoid the question.  Whether you possess a bit of factual information is much less important than your ability to show students how to retrieve such information for themselves.  Depending on the complexity and context of the question, you might suggest how the student can find an answer, or look up the information yourself and report how you found it at the beginning of the next class.

Writing Exercises

A.  In-class Writing 

By making writing an essential component of every class, we help our students to become less afraid of (and more practiced in) writing.  Not all writing needs to be graded; indeed, it does no harm to dissociate writing from grading.  For short assignments and exercises that you glance over rather than analyze, a check/plus/minus system of marking is sufficient.  You don’t even have to read all student writing; often, other students constitute the best audience for generative, informal writing tasks.  Ask your students to write as much and as often as possible, and ask them to read each other’s writing.  Frequent informal writing—in class and as homework—helps students see that reading and writing are interactive, recursive processes rather than separate, static chores. 

B.  Peer Reading and Revision Activities

The use of peer reading and revision groups or pairs helps students to become more conscious of the revision process, exposes them to their peers’ writing, and teaches them to read carefully.  Especially in the first weeks of class, it is essential that you give your students a handout with prompts that guide their responses.  (Your peers and officemates will have guidelines on file—don’t hesitate to ask them for samples. There are also some samples in Appendix V.)  Such activities should ask for more than correcting mechanical errors; students should be encouraged to focus on the elements of composition that you are working on at that particular time of the semester, such as argument, paragraph organization, source integration, and other larger issues.  Moreover, you will want to set up specific rules for the process.  Peer reading should not devolve into a “how do I tear this paper to shreds?” session; nor are writers helped by responses suggesting that they shouldn’t change a word.  You might want to model responses that are humanely and respectfully critical, so that students understand what to aim for in their comments.
Consider whether you want students to work with different partners in each session, or instead prefer to create permanent writing groups or pairs.  Students who switch partners for each session will be exposed to a wider variety of writing styles, while students placed in permanent groups may build a stable, more productive relationship with their partners.  
At first, students may be reluctant to criticize and revise their neighbor’s work.  Make it clear that their job is not to offer a teacherly evaluation of their partner’s work, but rather to identify the partner’s purpose and help the partner’s writing express that purpose as clearly and persuasively as possible.  During the revision workshop, you should monitor the class carefully, going from group to group, to insure that each student receives helpful responses.
To send the message that peer revision is an activity to be taken seriously, you can collect the revision sheets along with the final draft of the paper, and then evaluate both the revised essay and the peer reviewer’s suggestions.  When you are grading the revised essays, keep in mind that not all revision workshop suggestions are necessarily improvements (so be critical of both the author and the peer reader).

C.  Quizzes
Quizzes represent one way to ascertain whether your students are doing the out-of-class work you assign.  
Sometimes letting students know that class will begin with a quiz that texts their knowledge of the assigned reading might be a way to encourage them to arrive to class on time prepared to discuss the assignment. You can also get the same information in other ways, and you can insure that students read assigned material by asking for written work in conjunction with the reading.  Springing quizzes on students as a way of punishing them for not doing assigned work may create ill will, and it may treat the symptoms of a problem rather than the problem itself.  If, for example, you find that most students aren’t doing the assigned reading, you may want to ask yourself if you’re assigning too much reading, and whether you’re taking enough class time to work through the readings you have assigned. Often, students will find no incentive to read if you ignore assigned readings during class or fail to show how their reading will help them with their writing. You might reassure students that the reading was worth the effort by assigning low-stakes writing assignments about the reading in class.


Lecture

Useful lectures present material that cannot be integrated in discussion, clarify difficult concepts, provide background information, and synthesize covered material.  All of us know as auditors that it’s difficult to retain information presented in a long, rambling lecture read in a monotone. And we generally keep lectures to a minimum in writing classes, where we put the emphasis on students’ rhetorical practices.
 Effective lecturers try to keep lectures short and focused, to vary their pace and register, to speak (audibly and clearly) rather than read out loud, and to keep an eye on audience reactions (if you see many puzzled faces, stop and ask what is unclear).  Examples and analogies help make abstract information accessible.  Use of the chalkboard or whiteboard, a powerpoint presentation, or a handout to outline your main points will greatly facilitate your students’ ability to take useful notes.  While discussion is probably the most common format in the first year writing classroom, you need not shy away from lecturing.  A lecture can be a great summarizing device, and your students will be grateful when you present large chunks of material in a concise, coherent survey.

Group Work

Teaching through small-group activities has several advantages.  The students get to know each other, they are exposed to each other’s ideas, and they learn to use analytical terms easily in conversation.  Group work resembles revision workshops in terms of planning; we can’t just walk into the classroom and expect students to form balanced little groups.  Consider the dynamics of the classroom when you divide the class into small groups (place talkative students with less voluble ones; move domineering students around).  Generally, four people to a group is plenty.  When you make groups larger than that, it becomes too difficult for students to participate evenly.
Group activities should be focused: for example, you can have students answer a number of study questions, distributing the questions among the groups so that every group comes up with, and reports on, a different set of answers.  This gives the students practice in communicating their answers to others.  Define the task as specifically as possible: “Discuss the readings by Malcolm X and Benjamin Franklin” will make for unfocused responses, since students won’t be sure exactly what you want them to consider.  You’ll get more coherent answers with something like, “Select five books that Malcolm X mentions in this section from his autobiography, and explain how these specific books contribute to his overall thesis.”  To encourage students to keep at the task at hand, put a time limit on group work; fifteen minutes is usually more than enough.  Appoint a scribe in each group, a student who is responsible for recording the group’s answers in writing.
Don’t neglect to have students write together in small groups: for instance, ask them to revise a sample paragraph for a particular audience.  Another useful group activity is collaborative research.  Have students work together to locate as much information from as many different sources as possible on a given topic.  They’ll be less intimidated by the library if they go there together and work the online catalogues as a group.
After the group work, have the students share their findings with the class.  Keep an eye on the clock to make sure every group gets its say.  If you run out of time, however, you can still collect the groups’ written statements, combine them into a handout, and use them during the next class hour.

Writing as a Collaborative Process

Writing is often viewed as a solitary process, complete with techniques, rituals, and habits unique to each individual.  Part of the goal of English 110 is to begin to demystify the writing process for first year writing students and to enter them into conversation not only with their instructor but with other students as well.  There are several methods and activities for accomplishing this goal: peer review, conferences, and instructor-directed revision.  While each activity is useful on its own, these techniques for teaching the writing process are often most successful when skills are reinforced by using a combination of the three.


Peer Review

Peer review (also called peer response, peer conferencing, writing groups, workshopping, peer editing, etc.) has a variety of purposes.  Using writing groups (or pairs) assists students with the revision process, exposes them to their peers’ writing, and teaches them to read carefully and write critically about the work of others. Some examples of the peer review process are in Appendix IV, page 98. 

Students may be unfamiliar with the concept of peer review and equally unsure of the process involved (“I don’t know anything about writing, so how can I help anyone else?” is a common question).  They may be reluctant to criticize the work of their peers and thereby have a tendency to write overly positive reviews.  They may also forego commenting on larger issues like organization and evidence, focusing only on grammar and mechanics—the elements of writing they see as having hard and fast “rules” for evaluation.  Modeling the peer review process with your students is often an effective way to show students how to provide thorough, thoughtful responses that balance compliments and constructive criticism.  

In addition to modeling the peer review process, you should establish specific guidelines for students to follow for each workshop session.  Encourage your students to focus on the elements of composition that you are working on at that particular time of the semester, such as argument, paragraph organization, thesis statements, source integration, and other larger issues.  

Since successful workshop formats vary widely, in preparing to present your peer review guidelines to your students, there are several aspects of the peer review process that you will want to consider:

Group size.  Do you want students to work in pairs or groups?  How large do you want groups to be? (Three to five people is generally the most manageable.)

Group arrangement. How do you intend to form writing groups (assigned or chosen by students)?  Do you want the groups to stay the same throughout the semester or to shift with each assignment?

Active participation.  You may want to clarify for your students what constitutes a “draft.”  Is there a page minimum that needs to be reached by the workshop day?  Are there specific elements of the essay that need to be completed in order for a successful and productive peer review to occur?

Feedback. What form do you want the students’ responses to take: a written letter to their peer, a worksheet, a discussion on an electronic discussion board, and/or oral feedback?  

Evaluation.  How is the peer review process factored in to students’ grades?  Will you collect worksheets/revision suggestions along with the final draft? (Acknowledging that work done in peer review sessions will be evaluated often sends the message that the activity is to be taken seriously.)

Timing.  At what point in the writing process will a workshop be most useful?  (For some assignments, such as the research project, it might be useful to have multiple workshop days.)  Should students exchange papers and read them prior to meeting?  Should they read them aloud to each other during class time?  Will the entire workshop process be completed during class or will there be preliminary and/or follow-up assignments for the activity?

Instructor’s Role.  Will you have read the rough drafts before the in-class workshop?  Do you intend to participate in the groups’ discussions?  How will you circulate throughout the room and/or monitor individual student participation?  You may wish to conduct conferences with each group as an addition to (or in place of) the in-class workshop.  Group conferences are often a good way to guide students through the workshop process. (See suggestions for successful conferencing below.)

There are, needless to say, a wide variety of ways to conduct the peer review process.  Moreover, instructors, assignments, and students are ever changing variables in the equation for producing a successful peer response.  Discovering the process that works best for you and your students may take a bit of experimentation, but the benefits of a well-planned, well-executed workshop are often evidenced in the final drafts.

Commenting on Drafts

Since your course will place a great deal of emphasis on process and revision, we encourage you to read and comment on students’ rough drafts.  Students often need help and encouragement to work through the initial difficulties of interpreting assignment and writing a comprehensive essay in response to the particular questions posed.  Here are a few considerations to help student explore and articulate their ideas more fully:

Reacquaint yourself with the writing assignment and grading criteria.  Before commenting on rough drafts, reread the writing assignment.  In order to comment effectively and provide direction for revision, you’ll need to have a clear understanding of what you have asked them to do in their writing, as well as the criteria you will be using when you evaluate their final drafts.

Develop an understanding of the moves the writer is making in the rough draft.  Your main goals in reading the rough draft are to get a handle on how the writer is approaching the assignment and to understand how the writer is developing his or her ideas.  This can be frustrating, since much of what you’ll see in a rough draft is the writer working out his or her idea on paper.  Still, understanding where the writer is coming from is a crucial first step in developing some common ground for the comments you will make on the rough draft.  Aim to imagine the strongest essay that the student could write from this draft and to help him/her envision that goal, too, and gather the energy to work toward it.


Attend to more global issues like focus and organization.  Commenting on rough drafts is not the time to put a student paper under the microscope; unless you see a pattern of error, you might want to avoid correcting spelling, grammar, and punctuation.  Students can refine these areas as they work through subsequent drafts.  Use your comments on the rough draft as a way to encourage the writer to refine the focus and organization of the paper and to follow productive lines of inquiry that are emerging in the draft.

Student-Teacher Conferences

Student-teacher conferences are another effective method of collaborating with your students on their writing process and the products that evolve from it and English 110 is scheduled with a required conference hour every week.  (You can distribute these hours over the course of the semester in any way that makes sense with your calendar, allocating the time when your students need it most.)  Conferences in classes without the scheduled conference hour generally take one of two forms:

1. Two rounds of class-wide conferences during the semester in which you dismiss class and instead meet with each student for approximately 15-20 minutes (these conferences generally take place over a two- to three-day period).  

2. The conference initiated by the individual student.  In this situation, you need only respond to the student’s particular concern.  However, the same rules of conduct apply to all conferences.

Guidelines for Effective Conferencing

Because of the recitation hour, you might not want to do conferences outside of class. But in case you do, here are some guidelines:

Confer Out of Class.  If you teach one section of English 110, dismiss your class for one day (if you teach two classes, consider dismissing for two days).  You may count a missed conference as one absence.  Do not plan, however, to meet with all your students in one day (it gets exhausting!); you can probably plan on meeting with about half of your students on the cancelled class day and the rest over surrounding days.

Coordinate Your Conference Schedule.  Make sure to schedule several breaks into your conference days (e.g., one for every four or five conferences).  Not only will the break give you a chance to catch your breath (or grab a cup of coffee or something to eat), but it can also cushion your schedule if some of your conferences start to run a little long, as they often do.  Don’t schedule breaks during the time your class would normally meet, because those are slots during which you know your students will have no outside conflicts.  Prepare a conference sign-up sheet and circulate it among the students several times before the conferences.  Insist that each student record the meeting time, and make sure everyone knows where your office is (remember that just knowing a room number in the Klapper Hall does not mean students know how to find a room in it!).

Confer for Consequences.  Coordinate conferences with your syllabus.  Always schedule the meetings with a specific purpose in mind, so as not to waste the conference time just chatting with your students or attempting to discover any concerns they might have with the course.  Although building rapport with your students and getting feedback from them about the course are certainly worthy goals, the purpose of conferences should probably be a bit more substantial.  For example, you might have one conference in the first few weeks of the semester in order to go through a pre-graded assignment with the student and have a second round of conferences as the research paper is coming due.  Make sure students bring with them the rough drafts, sample sources, or other materials necessary for the conference.

Confer by the Clock.  Instructors and students alike should respect scheduled times.  To encourage students to attend their conferences, count the missed conference as equivalent to one day absent.  Better yet, set specific performance goals for the conference and grade students accordingly.  Students who miss the conference would then receive a zero for participation.

Confer with Control.  For the class-wide conferences, you might also consider setting fairly rigid parameters as to discussion topics appropriate for the meeting.  If, for instance, the purpose of the conference is to review a rough draft but a student instead comes prepared to debate a previous paper grade, for the sake of time and productivity encourage the student to schedule another appointment for that particular topic and then resume a discussion of the draft. Some students display a remarkable tenacity in arguing for higher grades or exemption from assignments.  If a student starts relying on emotional repetition rather than on logic, you have every right to ask that person to leave.  Dismiss also the purely comparative arguments; the rave response a paper may have received from the sage roommate or the elusive “other class” does not matter in the context of your course.  

Let Your Students Talk.  A conference, by definition, should encourage a two-way exchange of ideas; make the students take an active role in the process.  Whenever possible, let them do the talking and then respond to their ideas.  Resist the temptation to use the conference as a forum for delivering a private lecture to teach student (you won’t have time and you’ll probably get tired of repeating the exact same advice twenty or more times).

The conference should be a professional situation with an emphasis on rhetoric and on your class.  Rather than conduct counseling or therapy sessions, we can help students recognize appropriate services provided by the university.  We should neither solicit nor endure student opinion of our colleagues.

While conferences provide opportunities for dealing with unruly students, clarifying assignments, and addressing individual problems not shared by the whole class, you shouldn’t teach a separate 75-minute class in conference.  Remind students that they can supplement what they learn from you by going to the Writing Center; tutors there will help writers with all facets of writing.

Office Hours

Instructors are required to hold one office hour per week.  Be sure to announce your office hours to your students often and to be there during those scheduled times.  Let your students know that they can make appointments for discussion of their work-in-progress.  While students are certainly permitted to arrive “unannounced” to your office hours, you might encourage them to provide you with information about topics they would like to discuss prior to their office visit, if possible.  This will allow you to prepare for the meeting and to provide them with the best possible assistance.

Guiding Students’ Research

The Rosenthal Library staff has developed a bibliographic instruction program for students enrolled in English 110 courses at Queens.  The goal of this program is to give students the framework and skills necessary to do research in a large academic library.  These skills include identifying, locating, and obtaining sources for a research paper.  Our role in the process primarily entails guiding students through the process of narrowing their topics and exposing them to methods of evaluating, analyzing, and synthesizing sources. Please contact Angela Rao at 718-997-3747 or angela.rao@qc.cuny.edu  to set up a library information session for your class. For questions about library sessions, contact Alexandra de Luise at 718-997-3748 or alexandra.deluise@qc.cuny.edu.  For more information on the library session, and other library information, see Appendix II. 

A Note on Internet Sources

Some instructors, motivated partly by fears of plagiarism and partly by recognition that students must learn to use print resources, limit the number of Internet resources students can use, or even ban them.  Since our goal is to teach students to research widely, effectively, and efficiently, imposing bans or limits on Internet resources may be counter-productive.  Web sites published by Federal agencies provide a wealth of valuable information, the Internet is increasingly the site of scholarly activity, and many Web sites might be used as the object of extended analysis.  If you worry about student propensities to rely too heavily on electronic sources, stipulate that the research paper must use a certain number of print sources, and explain the reasons for this requirement to your students. As many have argued, the Internet offers writing instructors a fine opportunity to teach source analysis and evaluation—principles that apply to print sources as well.

Grading

Assigning grades to papers is likely one of the most anxiety-producing tasks any teacher faces.  The important thing to remember is to clearly connect your grading criteria with what you taught your students; prepare your students for what you're looking for.  If precise placement of a thesis statement is very important to you, share that with your students; if a dangling modifier is going to cause you heart palpitations, show students how to avoid that and incorporate it into your criteria explicitly.  

In this section of the handbook, we'll offer you three sample rubrics.  These rubrics are aligned with general departmental expectations for student writing, but no rubric will precisely fit with your teaching style and the skills you want to emphasize in your class.  We encourage you to use these sample rubrics as a starting point and to develop them further both on your own and with your students.  Students are far more likely to understand their grades and to respect your authority in grading if they're given the opportunity to have input on what the evaluation criteria will be.  Many students are surprisingly savvy at determining solid criteria for a given writing task.

Sample Rubric 1
(Adapted from the “Official Scoring Guide: Arizona’s Instrument to Measure Standards”)

In order to earn a grade of C, a paper must fulfill all of the stated content and format requirements for the assignment.  Beyond this basic requirement, grades reflect the standards described below.

A papers will possess all of the following characteristics:

Clear, focused, and interesting content suited to audience and purpose
Organization that is effective and easy to follow, including a strong introduction and conclusion and smooth, effective transitions
Sentences that show a high degree of craftsmanship, with consistently strong and varied structure
Exceptionally strong control of standard writing conventions: errors so few and so minor that the reader can easily skim right over them unless specifically searching for them

B papers may fulfill many of the A paper characteristics, with possible difference(s) such as:

Clear and focused content suited to audience and purpose
Predictable organization, introduction and conclusion adequate, transitions present 
Strong control over simple sentences, but variable control over more complex sentences
Occasional lapses in correct grammar and usage

C papers may parallel a few A paper characteristics and/or many B paper characteristics, with possible difference(s) such as (but not limited to):

Easily identifiable purpose and main ideas, but lacking focus and/or clarity
Somewhat unclear or under-developed, despite attempts at organization
Little control of complex sentences; repetitive sentence patterns; ineffective fragments
Errors in grammar and usage that do not block meaning but do distract the reader, or some control over conventions in a text that is too simple to reveal mastery

D papers may parallel many of the C paper characteristics, with possible difference(s) such as (but not limited to):

Fulfilling only some of the stated requirements
Ideas that are somewhat unclear, minimally developed or cluttered with irrelevant details
A lack of effective organizational structure which leaves the reader confused
A significant number of sentences that are awkward, choppy, or rambling
Errors in grammar and usage that interfere with readability and meaning

F papers may be deficient in that they:

Fulfill few or none of the stated requirements
Lack a central idea or purpose
Are not clearly organized
Contain sentence structure that frequently obscures meaning 
Demonstrate very limited skill in using conventions

Sample Rubric 2 
Adapted from Gordon Harvey, Writing Program at Harvard University

Grading Standards

When I evaluate your formal assignments, I am looking for inventive ideas expressed in engaging prose. Your writing should both please and enlighten readers and give them a sense of why your project is important—why what you have to say needs to be said. I evaluate the words on the page before me and do not factor in potential, improvement, or effort. The work you put into an assignment will most certainly be evident in the completed essay. These are the general standards to which I hold essays. Plusses and minuses represent shades of difference. (I will provide more detailed explanation of my grading standards when I return graded assignments.)
• An “A” range essay is both ambitious and successful. It presents and develops focused and compelling set of ideas with grace, confidence, and control. It integrates and responds to sources subtly and persuasively.
• A “B” range essay is one that is ambitious but only partially successful, or one that achieves modest aims well. A “B” essay must contain focused ideas, but these ideas may not be particularly complex, or may not be presented or supported well at every point. It integrates sources efficiently, if not always gracefully.   
• A “C” range essay has significant problems in articulating and presenting its central ideas, though it is usually focused and coherent. Such essays often lack clarity and use source material in simple ways, without significant analysis or insight.
• A “D” range essay fails to grapple seriously with either ideas or texts, or fails to address the expectations of the assignment. A “D” essay distinguishes itself from a failing essay by showing moments of promise, such as emerging, though not sufficiently developed or articulated ideas. “D” essays do not use sources well, though there may some effort to do so.
• A failing essay does not grapple with either ideas or texts, or does not address the expectations of the assignment. It is often unfocused or incoherent.




Getting It Done: Grading Advice

There is no ideal approach to grading papers; everyone you ask will give you different tips for handling the job.  There are a number of fair and effective methods of grading: which of these you choose is less important than developing a stable and consistent approach.  Each of your students will write four revised essays and many more pages of in-class writing, response papers, blog posts, etc., during the semester, and grading these hundreds of pages requires you to be systematic.  Here are a few basic grading considerations:

1.  Set a schedule.  Some like to organize their grading by time (i.e., “I’ll grade for three hours tonight”) others by papers (i.e., “I’ll grade seven papers tonight”).  After a stack or two, you’ll get a sense of what works best for you; it’s worth thinking about. It’s crucial that you return your essays in a timely manner, both to keep to the calendar that you set and to model professionalism for your students.  Once you decide how many days you have to grade a batch of essays, you can decide how to distribute the work.

2.  Don’t put off your grading until the last possible minute.  Both you and your students suffer when you grade all papers in a last-ditch marathon.

3.  Know your criteria.  If you’ve told students you are most concerned with the specificity of their thesis statements for essay #1, then your comments and grading range should reflect that priority.  Before you start grading papers, reread your assignment and announced criteria; think about what you taught and what students practiced in the classes leading to the assignment.

4.  Read through a paper once quickly before you comment.  This will enable you to grasp the thesis and overall structure, and to spot any major problem areas before diving into the intricacies of individual sentences.

5.  Be selective.  You need not write down comments on every sentence or potential problem in an essay.  Identify and comment on recurring problems or those problems you see as most serious.

6.  Don’t spend too much time on each paper.  Try to limit yourself to no more than 20 minutes per short papers (3-5 pp.); later in your progress, you may get your time down to 10-15 minutes per short essay.  We’re not pushing you to set speed records with your grading, but we recognize that you will want to manage this time-consuming task so that you have time for your own course work.  


7.  Keep moving.  If you’ve completed your comments on a paper but can’t decide between an A- or a B+, make a note to yourself to go back to that paper later and determine the final grade.  Don’t agonize over it for half an hour. It may help to pencil in a grade on each paper, and then once you’ve finished reading the stack to go back and decide on the final grade based on how the class did as a whole.



8.  Calibrate.  After you’ve read through the entire stack and tentatively penciled in grades, go back through the stack, separating the papers by grade (i.e., make an “A” pile, a “B” pile, etc.).  Then, go through each pile and ask yourself whether all of your A papers (your B papers, etc.) seem to be of roughly the same quality.  You will find yourself making minor adjustments, shifting one paper from the “B” pile to the “C” pile and so on.

9.  Never promise to deliver graded papers on a specific day.  If you name a date, and then something unforeseen prevents you from meeting that deadline, your students will be disappointed and angry, no matter how good your excuse is.  As a rule, you should return papers to students before you require them to turn in the next paper.  Allow them time to apply the advice you’ve given them in your comments.

10.  Return papers at the end of class.  If you return them at the beginning, students will be distracted.

11.  Before returning papers, make some photocopies.  Look for drafts, peer comments, and passages from finished work that you might want to use for later activities.  Copy two or three revised papers so you have a record of how students responded to your assignment—if you use the same assignment in a later course, these samples can help future students.

Writing Comments
Of course your students will be most concerned with the bottom line, the grade at the end of the paper.  But even more important, from our perspective, are the comments you write to tell your students how well they have done and where their papers could use some rewriting.  
Paper comments fall into two categories: marginal comments throughout the essay, and the summarizing end comments.  Ideally, they serve different purposes.
Marginal comments.  Use marginal and between-sentence comments to point out strengths and weaknesses of individual sentences, point out one or two carefully selected grammatical problems, praise a particularly strong piece of diction, etc.  If you begin to see the same problem throughout the essay —say, lack of concrete examples to support analysis—you can put a check mark next to each paragraph and write “see end comment.”  Marginal comments can be descriptive as well as evaluative: you can use them, for example, to show how the paper creates and fulfills (or fails to fulfill) the expectations of the reader.
End comments.  Use end comments to summarize the success(es) of the paper and to point out problem areas or developing strengths in the student’s writing that he or she should be aware of for the next essay.
When you write an end comment, consider your overall impression of the writing: How well does it answer the specific demands of the assignment?  Could you follow the writer’s argument from the beginning of the essay to the end?  If not, where and why did the writer lose you?  What is good about the paper?  Begin your end comments with these strengths.
Both marginal comments and end comments require you to be as specific in your diagnosis of students’ writing as you ask them to be in their essays.  For example, a comment like “Your opening paragraphs are good, but later they become vague” is not very helpful, because it indicates only that you approved of some paragraphs and disapproved of others.  Explain why the opening paragraphs are good and how exactly paragraph eight conveys vagueness to you as a reader.  
It is inevitable that you will begin to use rhetorical jargon in your comments (“transitions,” “paragraph coherence,” “static thesis”) or your own terms for certain problems or successes.  But make sure your students know what your shorthand means by defining those words in context.  Avoid vaguely negative terms such as awkward and vague.  Instead choose more specific, rewrite-focused language such as “needs more examples.”
Always make it clear to students that you will be happy to explain your comments if they do not understand them.

Discussing Grades

Periodically, students will have questions about the grades you give them on assignments.  You shouldn’t feel threatened by such questions, since students are entitled to know what your grading standards are and how they can better meet these standards. You can ensure that you stand on a firm ground in these conversations by grading every essay fairly and sincerely, assessing the merits of the essay alone.
New teachers sometimes worry about being too harsh in their grading, so that when a student asks about a low grade, they are tempted to become either defensive or apologetic.  You can avoid this sort of emotional response by allowing yourself (and the student) some time to think things over.  If a student asks about a grade as soon as she receives the paper, defer the discussion for a day or two so that the student can read and consider your written comments in more detail.  We recommend that you make a 24-hour waiting period part of your classroom policies.  The problem may take care of itself; even if it doesn’t, your request that the student read and think about your comments helps convert discussion from grades considered as abstract standards of meaning to discussion of the writing itself.
If after a couple of days the student still doesn’t understand your evaluation of the paper, ask to review the paper again before you meet with her.  You may even show it to the directors of FYW to get a second opinion.  When the student arrives, review your criteria; you may end up merely elaborating on what you’ve written in your end comment—sometimes that’s all that’s needed.  In most cases, talk about the grade (the student’s agenda) can lead to talk about the writing (our agenda); you can simultaneously be firm about your grade and encourage the student to talk over ways to write a stronger paper next time.
Occasionally, a student may try to influence you to change the grade, not just explain it.  Be polite but firm.  You do not need to send every student away from your office satisfied, and you most certainly do not have to tolerate any aggressive behavior.  Should such a problem arise, end the conference immediately and discuss the matter with the FYW directors. 
If you feel that a student has a problem with your class that requires third-party intervention, discuss it with the directors of FYW, who may then decide to meet with the student separately to help resolve the impasse.
   	

Calculating Grades

There are two basic ways to calculate grades: on a 100-point scale and a four-point scale.  Below is a brief description of how to do grades either way (all students’ grades will eventually be converted to a four-point scale for the purposes of determining grade-point averages, but you assign letter grades -- and pluses and minuses do carry different weights at this university.)

100-point scale

1. You can convert letter grades to a percentage using the following scale:

A+ 	97-100		B+	87-89		C+	77-79		D+	67-69
A	93-96		B	83-86		C	73-76		D	60-66
A-	90-92		B-	80-82		C-	70-72		F	 0-59



2. Convert homework/response papers/journal grades into a letter grade and then a number -- if you're using points, divide the number of points received into number of points possible; if you're using a check system, decide how that translates to grades: you may want a check plus to be an A, a check to be a B, a check minus to be a C, for example, or you may want it to be a more organic decision that accounts for improvement.

3. Convert participation/attendance grades into a letter grade and then a number, using the scale above.  

4. Use a calculator/spreadsheet/pencil to calculate grades, for example:

Paper one 			C+	at 10%		78 x .10 =    7.80
Paper two 			B   	at 15%		85 x .15 =  12.75
Paper three 			B  	at 15%		85 x .15 =  12.75
Research Project 		B-	at 25% 		82 x .25 =  20.50
Journal/Response Papers	C  	at 20%		75 x .20 =  15.00
Participation/Attendance	B  	at 15%	 	85 x .15 =  12.75 (add all)
							     
      81.55 = B-

Four-point Scale

1. You can convert letter grades to a number using the following scale:

A+	4.0 		B+	3.33 		C+	2.33		D+	1.33	 
A	4.0		B	3.0		C	2.0		D	1.0
A-	3.67 		B- 	2.67 		C-	1.67		D-	0.67
F	0 - .50

2. Convert homework/response papers/journal grades into a letter grade and then a number—if you're using points, divide the number of points received into number of points possible; if you're using a check system, decide how that translates to grades: you may want a check plus to be an A, a check to be a B, a check minus to be a C, for example, or you may want it to be a more organic decision that accounts for improvement.

3. Convert participation/attendance grades into a letter grade and then a number, using the scale above.  

4. Use a calculator/spreadsheet/pencil to calculate grades, for example:

Paper one 			C+	at 10%		2.33 x .10 = .23    
Paper two 			B   	at 15%		3.0   x .15 = .45
Paper three 			B  	at 15%		3.0   x .15 = .45
Research Project 		B-	at 25% 		2.67 x .25 = .67
Journal/Response Papers	C  	at 20%		2.0   x .20 = .40
Participation/Attendance	B  	at 15%	 	3.0   x .15 = .45 (add all)
							     
      	     2.64 = B-


QC’s Policies on Assigning Final Grades

From the Queens College Registrar’s Office:

Undergraduate Grade Equivalencies: 

A+ 	97-100		B+	87-89		C+	77-79		D+	67-69
A	93-96		B	83-86		C	73-76		D	60-66
A-	90-92		B-	80-82		C-	70-72		F	 0-59

Incompletes, WU, and Grade Disputes
Students who fail English 110 can retake the course, and their new grade will override their first failing mark. (Any F received in the first semester at QC is automatically converted to NC – no credit.) 

INC (Incomplete) is not an automatic grade. It is a temporary grade that may be assigned by faculty when a student has requested an INC and meets all of the following conditions: some of the course requirements other than but possibly including the final examination have not been satisfied for good and sufficient reason as determined by the instructor; and there is a reasonable expectation that a student can pass the course by submitting the outstanding work by the end of the next regular semester, Spring or Fall. The assignment of INC constitutes an agreement with the student that the instructor or department will receive, evaluate, and submit a grade for the missing course requirements, upon submission of the outstanding work by the student. This requires the instructor to fill out a change of grade form before the end of the following semester, have it signed by the English department chair, and submit it to the Registrar’s office. Any agreement with a student for an INC should be in writing. Please consult with the directors of First Year Writing before agreeing to give a student an incomplete.

WU (Withdrawn Unofficially) is assigned by the instructor to indicate that the student stopped attending
the course before the end of the semester; or as a result of excessive absences there is no basis to give a final letter grade of A+ to F, and the conditions for a grade of INC do not apply.

If a student disputes a grade, contact the directors of First Year Writing, who will intervene and help resolve the issue. 

Common Grading Misconceptions

“The B Fallacy”

As you grade, be on the alert for the B fallacy: the temptation to overuse the B.  This grade does, after all, seem like a nice compromise: an essay is not A quality and a C is so...average.  To many teachers, new and experienced alike, a C seems like a condemnation. Why not a B?  If you think you are assigning too many B's and are vaguely dissatisfied with and confused by your practice, try to get back on track by asking yourself what elements in the essay deserve that grade. What, in short, makes this essay better than average?  Is it word choice?  organization?  expression of ideas?  If you can honestly point to a specific area in which the essay is better than most others you've seen, it may deserve the B.  If you can find no specific area in which the essay excels, you can be fairly certain it is indeed average. (The St. Martin's Guide to Teaching Writing 151)

One question sure to come up as you read the above is how to determine the definition of "average."  It may help to think of "average" as "competent"-- and competent starts with a C, which may make more sense anyway in terms of grade descriptors.

“First Set Fallacies”

Sometimes instructors think they should grade the first set of papers (or journals or response papers) differently than the rest.  Philosophies differ, but generally they fall into two categories: the "it's the first paper, so in order to not discourage them, they all get high grades" or the "it's the first paper, so to encourage them to work hard, I'll grade hard."  We encourage all instructors to grade all papers based on how well they meet the criteria set forth, not based on the time of the semester.  For every student who will be motivated by a low grade at the beginning of the semester is one who would be discouraged, and vice versa.  Better to let students negotiate their efforts in your class based on grades and comments which consistently and accurately reflect the writing they produce.

Academic Integrity

Violations of academic integrity produce anxiety on the part of teachers and students alike.  For teachers, this anxiety may arise from trying to lump different practices and intentions into one ambiguous term.  To begin sorting out some of these practices, we'd like to suggest a distinction between cheating and unfamiliarity with the conventions used to produce documented academic texts.  Students who download papers from the Internet or copy them from previous students are clearly cheating.  On the other hand, students are not always being dishonest when they incorrectly document sources or represent the knowledge of other people.  As teachers, it is our job to teach the conventions of representing knowledge in the university. With that in mind, we devote significant class time to discussions of “academic integrity,” which includes not only proper citation, but solid argumentation with the use of evidence.


However, conventions of documentation are not the same for all disciplines, as is made clear by the concept of common knowledge.  As Margaret Price says, "Common knowledge in the neuorobiology biology department of my university is different from common knowledge in the English department."1  When writing, we must have specific knowledge of our audience and their expectations for citation, as well as their understanding of what the facts are in the context in which we are writing.  When we communicate to students that they need to ask questions such as: "what audience am I writing for?  What assumptions, what bases for knowledge, do I think this community shares?  If I were to publish this essay, in what kind of publications would it appear?"2 we help demystify academic conventions and put the focus back on the rhetorical situation rather than the honesty/dishonesty binary of plagiarism.

Since most of our students come to class unfamiliar with not only the kinds of writing done at colleges and universities, but also why that writing is done, it's best to start with discussion of these practices when talking about academic conventions.  Many teachers have created assignments that ask their students to talk with professors in their discipline (or in a discipline of their choice if they have no major) about the kinds of writing they do and why they do it.  Having students report back to the class about what they found gives the class a sense of the diversity of writing taking place at the university.  (This activity can serve as a useful introduction to the research assignment.)

First-year students frequently do not recognize the distinction between their own work and someone else's. Remembering this will help you avoid taking it personally.  It is our job to teach them to understand and establish this distinction appropriately in their academic papers, not to punish them for not knowing a skill they have not yet been taught.  It takes time to discover the expectations and assumptions of an unfamiliar audience; it takes more time to internalize this information and mobilize it in one's writing.  Focusing on techniques for teaching ways to address the rhetorical situation should help to alleviate much of the anxiety felt by both teachers and students when addressing plagiarism. 

For more information and resources, see http://writingatqueens.org/for-faculty/plagiarism-resources/CUNY POLICY ON ACADEMIC INTEGRITY

(The full policy can be found at:  http://www.qc.cuny.edu/StudentLife/Documents/AcademicIntegrityPolicywithoutmemo.pdf/)

Academic Dishonesty is prohibited in The City University of New York and is punishable by penalties, including failing grades, suspension, and expulsion, asprovided herein.

I. Definitions and Examples of Academic Dishonesty

Cheating is the unauthorized use or attempted use of material, information, notes, study aids, devices or communication during an academic exercise.

The following are some examples of cheating, but by no means is it an exhaustive list:

Copying from another student during an examination or allowing another to copy your work.
Unauthorized collaboration on a take home assignment or examination.
Using notes during a closed book examination.
Taking an examination for another student, or asking or allowing another student to take an examination for you.
Changing a graded exam and returning it for more credit.
Submitting substantial portions of the same paper to more than one course without consulting with each instructor.
Preparing answers or writing notes in a blue book (exam booklet) before an examination.
Allowing others to research and write assigned papers or do assigned projects, including use of commercial term paper services.
Giving assistance to acts of academic misconduct/ dishonesty.
Fabricating data (all or in part).
Submitting someone else’s work as your own.
Unauthorized use during an examination of any electronic devices such as cell phones, palm pilots, computers or other technologies to retrieve or send information.
Plagiarism is the act of presenting another person’s ideas, research or writings as your own.

The following are some examples of plagiarism, but by no means is it an exhaustive list:

Copying another person’s actual words without the use of quotation marks and footnotes attributing the words to their source.
Presenting another person’s ideas or theories in your own words without acknowledging the source.
Using information that is not common knowledge without acknowledging the source.
Failing to acknowledge collaborators on homework and laboratory assignments.
Internet plagiarism includes submitting downloaded term papers or parts of term papers, paraphrasing or copying information from the internet without citing the source, and “cutting & pasting” from various sources without proper attribution.


The Cheating Aspect

The above CUNY Policy on Academic Integrity (revised July 1, 2011) addresses cheating and plagiarism.  
Plagiarism is defined as "the act of presenting another person’s ideas, research or writing as your own” and is distinguished from purchasing papers from term paper companies or turning in another student's work, which is defined as cheating, rather than plagiarism.  The university considers plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty to be a serious breach of academic ethics.  Penalties range from a failing grade on the plagiarized work to failure in the course and dismissal from the College. You can also report the student in a way that only records the incident with the school without an institutional penalty (this allows the school to keep track of repeat offenders). Students have specific rights to respond to allegations before penalties are implemented, and to appeal penalties.  If you do come across a paper that you believe is plagiarized, attempt to find the sources(s).  Please do not make any accusations until you have talked with the directors of First Year Writing.  If you find convincing and demonstrable evidence of plagiarism or cheating, the directors will help you handle the situation in a way that is fair to the student and conforms to CUNY and Queens College guidelines. The Academic Integrity Violation Form, which you can find on page 87 in Appendix III, indicates the procedural steps implemented by Queens College’s Office of Student Affairs. 
While both instructors and students should take academic dishonesty seriously, discussions of plagiarism should also acknowledge its complexity as a wide range of practices with varying intentions.  Students' own confusion about what constitutes plagiarism may draw on wider uncertainties about the use and ownership of ideas.  Rather than addressing plagiarism only in terms of crime and punishment or honesty and dishonesty, instructors should encourage students to think about the varying conventions and expectations for using sources and give students opportunities to use and cite sources in different writing situations.  It is important to remember that much popular non-fiction in newspapers, magazines, and books—material students are very familiar with and that you might well be asking them to read—does not follow academic practices of citation.  In addition, the changing nature of conventions provides an opportunity to look critically at the University’s Academic Integrity policy as a class and determine how new practices and writing environments (such as in web bulletin boards, or other new online repositories for writing) might fit with or challenge current policies.

As the teacher, there are some practices you might adopt to deter cheating:
-Create specific, carefully crafted assignments to invite fresh and independent writing.
-Change significantly any assignment you do not create yourself.
-Discuss your students' papers with them at various stages of the writing process in conferences or informally in class.
-Schedule checkpoints for bibliographies, source evaluations, summaries, notes, and drafts, especially for the research paper, to head off any potentially troublesome cases.
-Have students document their research and writing processes with a number of short assignments (memos to you, in-class writing, annotated bibliographies, and the like).

If, despite your best efforts, you receive a paper that you suspect is plagiarized, please contact the Directors and remember to follow these steps: 

1. Please don’t accuse the student of plagiarism, or mention plagiarism as an issue to the student, until you have consulted the Directors.
2. If you can identify the source work for the plagiarized paper, and demonstrate plagiarism, please let the Directors know.  
3. The Director will help you work through the specific procedures to be followed in a plagiarism case and decide on an appropriate penalty. 


Teaching Source Use

Discussion and practices related to source use should come up at several points during the semester.  Again, discussing the research practices of members of the university community helps students place themselves and their work within the context of academic inquiry and presentation.  Encourage students to think in terms of source use as they bring together arguments from assignments with their own ideas as they write throughout the semester. You should expect students to struggle with how to represent others' words and ideas even when you have covered it in class; therefore, plan activities that allow for hands-on practice and feedback.  Below are several examples of activities created by writing instructors that work along these lines. For another useful document on teaching source use, see the excerpt from Mark Gaipa’s “Breaking into the Conversation” on page 87 in Appendix III. 


Sample Quotation Handout1

[The following handout discusses how quotations can be used in academic prose to further argumentation.  It can help students to see the inclusion of quotations as increasing their credibility as writers, rather than making it look like their argument isn’t their own.]

Using Quotations and Making Arguments

Although Jojo Binks posits that "students love[d] to dance around the quad naked on a regular basis" (33), university documents provide no evidence of any such behavior; in fact, the official online university charter describes students on campus as having always been "uniformly well-behaved and focused on scholastics" (Queens College). The stark difference in these two accounts of student behavior points to the probability that neither account is completely accurate. It is as unlikely that many students actually danced around the quad naked at all, much less on a regular basis, as it is that students here have always been "uniformly well-behaved." The reality is probably somewhere in between these two arguments, but for the people writing the documents, this may be both the truth as they see it and the image of university life they'd like their audience to believe.

The example above demonstrates one way (among many possible ways) to: 
(a) incorporate quotations into the writer's own sentence 
(b) have sources converse with one another
(c) start to analyze deeply based on short quotations
(d) pay close attention to the wording of the quotations themselves as sites to converse with the sources and contend with their accuracy (note the focus on "a regular basis" and "uniformly well-behaved")
(e) start to analyze why a person might write something based on their intended/expected audience
(f) change the tense of a quotation so it fits within the writer's sentence (note the "[d]" added to "love"—you can add words or changed tenses using brackets to make your sentence work with the quotation.)

Think of a different, brief, way of using these same pieces of evidence (you may quote or paraphrase) to make some argument. You could use a similar argument as the one above, but construct it in a different way or you could argue something completely different. Here's the citation and other information you have to work with (it's all completely fake):

Binks, Jojo. Personal Letter to Amanda Garcia. Scrapbook. 1937. 33-35.

"My favorite thing about going to school here is that students love to dance around the quad naked on a regular basis."

"Queens College Official Charter." 5 Oct. 2001. 12 Nov. 2002 <http://www.qc.cuny.edu/ officialcharter/i made this up/gotcha>.1
"Students at Queens College have, since the college's inception, been uniformly well-behaved and focused on scholastics more than on any forms of extracurricular activities."

Sample Plagiarism Handout

[The following activity provides two pieces of incorrect attribution and asks students to fix them.  This activity can be used to foster discussion of students’ confusions about MLA format, as well as more global concerns about citation practices.]


Avoiding Plagiarism Incorporating and Attributing Your Sources

Identify and correct the plagiarism in the samples. In your correction, be sure to make attributions—identify the author and smooth the "seams" between your source's ideas and your writing. Add in-text citations when needed.

Source: John Culhane, The American Circus p. 305
At the Cirque Napoleon in Paris in 1859, Jules Leotard presented the first flying trapeze act. A contemporary account marveled at Leotard's "reckless breakneck flights from trapeze to trapeze like some tropical bird swooping from branch to branch." In case he fell, a padded mattress was spread the whole length of the stage. Eventually, the mattress was replaced by a net ... the old-fashioned rope net is the form of protection still used in the circus. "The net itself can be very dangerous," said Tito Gaona [a trapeze artist], "but it's a circus tradition. Our fans love to see us bounce from the net."
Paraphrased: According to John Culhane, the first flying trapeze act was in Paris in 1859. Jules Leotard swung from the trapeze like a tropical bird swooping from branch to branch, and audiences ever since have been thrilled by the daring man on the flying trapeze. To break his fall, "a padded mattress was spread" that covered the length of the stage. Even though technology has improved, the net is a circus tradition. Tito Gaona says that fans "love" to see them "bounce" from the net.


Source: John Culhane, The American Circus, p.132
In [P.T.] Barnum's version, Jumbo laid down his own life to save the little clown elephant, Tom Thumb. Jumbo, wrote the master publicist, "snatched the little elephant from in front of the thundering train and hurled the little fellow twenty yards to safety." After he rescued Tom Thumb, wrote Barnum, Jumbo turned to face the oncoming freight.... "Jumbo ... gave but one groan after being struck and then assumed an attitude of determination and composed himself to meet death with a becoming dignity and fortitude." Millions of Americans, including those who had never seen Jumbo, mourned him as if they had lost a beloved pet and preferred to accept Barnum's version of his death.

Paraphrased: Barnum invented his own version of the death of Jumbo the Elephant. "Millions of Americans" were saddened by the elephant's death. They behaved as if they had lost a beloved pet, says Culhane. Barnum described how Jumbo met his death being very determined, with a "dignity" that elephants don't usually have, and fortitude.

Sample “Works Cited” Handout

This activity engages students in an entertaining, fast-paced, citation showdown.  Bring in 10 different items (book, journal article, email, interview, etc.) and have groups of students compete to create a works cited page that lists all 10 documents.  Don’t forget to do this yourself before class so you can quickly see which group is the winner.

Writing Bibliographic Entries for a Works Cited Page

Exercise: Your goal, with the other members of your group, is to write correct and complete works cited entries for each of the ten items at the front of the room. The group to correctly complete the ten items first will win. (Remember, the fastest group doesn't necessarily win. The winning group is that with the fasted time and all the entries completed correctly.)

Rules and Tips:
1. Your group may only possess one item at a time. If caught with more than one item, you will receive a penalty.

2. All the entries you wish to turn in must be written on one paper with all the group members' names on it. I will not accept entries written on separate sheets of paper.

3. You will need to refer to http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/747/01/ and http://writingatqueens.org/for-students/what-is-plagiarism/ for rules and guidelines on how to correctly write each entry. The entries must be written according to the MLA documentation standards. MLA format sources will serve as reference to you throughout your college career. Now is the time to learn to use them! 

4. Your group may only ask me two questions during the completion of the game. (And these questions cannot be if a certain entry is written correctly, though I can answer questions about specific elements of an entry.)

5. A works cited entry must be written in the space next to the number corresponding to the number physically attached to the item. There are ten items total.

6. Groups caught copying off of other groups will be immediately disqualified.

7. If I cannot read an entry, I will consider it incorrect. Please write legibly. 

8. Remember to indent the second and subsequent lines of each entry.

Final Thoughts

Teaching citation practices doesn’t need to be a tedious bore, as these activities show.  And while all of them discuss MLA citation practices, it’s not necessary to ask your students to use MLA only (although it’s perfectly ok to require them to do so).  Some of your students might be in disciplines which use APA or Chicago—you might encourage them to learn these practices instead, and to report to the class the differences between the style they are using and MLA.  Some of your students might take their second writing course (EC2) in a different discipline, where they will practice a different mode of citation.  You should prepare them for this possibility by showing them examples of the citation practices that you don’t explicitly require, and explaining the rationale behind those differences.

Examining these differences can lead to interesting discussions of which types of knowledge disciplines seem to value.  Of course, it’s not necessary to do this, and may lead to a bit of a headache during grading, since you will need to be familiar with the styles your students may choose.  A helpful site for students and instructors alike is http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/




 


Student-Teacher Relations

The Syllabus

A clear and forceful explanation of your policies on the first day of class sets the level of expectations for the semester. On the first day of class, distribute a syllabus outlining your policies on attendance; late, missed, or uncompleted work; and plagiarism.  You may also wish to add what you expect students to call you and what your email policy is (if that is the best way for them to contact you, how often you will be checking it and what your general response time is, and the appropriate way for a student to address an email to a professor).

Talk through the syllabus in class, so students understand what you expect of them, and remind them to keep it handy.  Throughout the semester, direct students to the syllabus as necessary. 

In addition to making clear what you expect of your students, let them know what they may expect of you.  Make known your office hours, and keep them.  Arrive on time for class.  If you will be absent, try to arrange for a colleague to substitute for you and notify FYW and the English department office.

You will see a sample syllabus in the “Class Documents” section of the handbook.

Discipline

It is unlikely that you will ever encounter an overt disciplinary problem in your college teaching.  In the rare event that you do, refer that problem immediately to the directors of the program, who aim above all to ensure the safety and health of our shared workplace.
You are not expected to have to deal with abusive or disruptive behavior.  You, the teacher, are in charge of the orderly conduct of the class and may exclude any student or visitor who does not comply with a reasonable request in this regard.
Not all disciplinary problems are overt, however.  If you feel that a student or group of students is behaving in a way that is intimidating or disrespectful to you or to others in the classroom, or damaging to the learning environment of your class, consult the Directors for help in evaluating the situation and designing appropriate remedies. For this reason, we encourage any email correspondence with students to use QC email in case disciplinary issues arise.

Sexual Harassment

According to the University’s Policy Against Sexual Harassment, “It is the policy of the City University of New York to promote a cooperative work and academic environment in which there exists mutual respect for all CUNY students, faculty, and staff. Harassment of employees or students based upon sex is inconsistent with this objective and contrary to the CUNY’s nondiscrimination policy. Sexual harassment is illegal under federal, state, and city laws, and will not be tolerated within CUNY.”
As teachers, we must not tolerate such harassment should it occur at any time in our classrooms, whether directed at us or at another student.  Nor should we tolerate a student’s harassing behavior toward us outside the classroom.  Perhaps of greatest importance, we must never take advantage of our position of authority to force students to endure such harassment themselves.
Formal harassment complaints may be initiated in consultation with the head of the Department of English.

Students with Mental Health Issues

If you have a student who has some kind of behavioral problem that makes you worried, you should file a report with the Office of Student Affairs even if the student hasn't violated any policies or broken any rules. The College assembles a "behavioral intervention team"—that is, somebody from the counseling office, somebody from public safety, and people from a few other offices—to figure out how they can help students who are in trouble, or who might cause trouble for others.  The team meets every two weeks to discuss the reports that come in via this link: http://sl.qc.cuny.edu/behavioral.php . 

Note that any member of the college community can file a Behavioral Intervention Team (BIT) report, so you can pass this link on to your students if they express concerns to you about other students or faculty. Also note that these reports can't be anonymous, because the counselors and administrators at the BIT want to know who to contact if they have any questions about what happened.
Please consult the Directors of First Year Writing if you have an issue with a student that makes you concerned.
Behaviors

In most instructors’ experience, students are in fact quite forgiving about honest and isolated mistakes.  Many of us have found that on those occasions when we’ve committed an error in judgment, students have respected forthright admission of our mistake (though none of us has wanted to test this response too often).  Larger lapses in professionalism, however, interfere with a student’s right to learn, and they will almost certainly alienate a class. Failure to meet class, keep office hours, keep appointments, or prepare for class; displays of anger directed at students, or attempts to humiliate them for their lack of knowledge; failure to maintain a decorum suitable to a college class, or allowing a student or group of students to disrupt others’ attempts to learn; overt favoritism; and failure to return papers in a reasonable period of time with useful comments head this list of behaviors.  Most of us find that as we respect students’ desire to learn and succeed, they respect our desire to teach well.

Many of us have also noticed that students show increasing signs of stress six weeks or so into the semester, especially in the fall.  Our classes cause only a part of their stress, but it may be helpful to remember, as you return a batch of papers including several low grades, that some students may be receiving a C for the first time in any class.  Students may find it very helpful to know that you genuinely expect their writing and their grades to improve as they become more familiar with the new skills you’re teaching.



FERPA

If a parent, guardian, or any other family member or friend asks for information about a student’s grade or other progress in your class, you are required by law not to disclose if that student is over eighteen:   
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) (20 U.S.C. § 1232g; 34 CFR Part 99) is a Federal law that protects the privacy of student education records. The law applies to all schools that receive funds under an applicable program of the U.S. Department of Education. FERPA gives parents certain rights with respect to their children's education records. These rights transfer to the student when he or she reaches the age of 18 or attends a school beyond the high school level. Students to whom the rights have transferred are "eligible students."  For more information: http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/index.html

Seven Principles for Good Practice 
in Undergraduate Education1

1. Good Practice Encourages Contact Between Students and Faculty
Frequent student-faculty contact in and out of class is a most important factor in student motivation and involvement. Faculty concern helps students get through rough times and keep on working. Knowing a few faculty members well enhances students' intellectual commitment and encourages them to think about their own values and plans.
2. Good Practice Develops Reciprocity and Cooperation Among Students
Learning is enhanced when it is more like a team effort than a solo race. Good learning, like good work, is collaborative and social, not competitive and isolated. Working with others often increases involvement in learning. Sharing one's ideas and responding to others' improves thinking and deepens understanding.
3. Good Practice Uses Active Learning Techniques
Learning is not a spectator sport. Students do not learn much just sitting in classes listening to teachers, memorizing prepackaged assignments, and spitting out answers. They must talk about what they are learning, write reflectively about it, relate it to past experiences, and apply it to their daily lives. They must make what they learn part of themselves.
4. Good Practice Gives Prompt Feedback
Knowing what you know and don't know focuses your learning. In getting started, students need help in assessing their existing knowledge and competence. Then, in classes, students need frequent opportunities to perform and receive feedback on their performance. At various points during college, and at its end, students need chances to reflect on what they have learned, what they still need to know, and how they might assess themselves.
5. Good Practice Emphasizes Time on Task
Time plus energy equals learning. Learning to use one's time well is critical for students and professionals alike. Allocating realistic amounts of time means effective learning for students and effective teaching for faculty.
6. Good Practice Communicates High Expectations
Expect more and you will get it. High expectations are important for everyone—for the poorly prepared, for those unwilling to exert themselves, and for the bright and well motivated. Expecting students to perform well becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.
7. Good Practice Respects Diverse Talents and Ways of Learning
Many roads lead to learning. Different students bring different talents and styles to college. Brilliant students in a seminar might be all thumbs in a lab or studio; students rich in hands-on experience may not do so well with theory. Students need opportunities to show their talents and learn in ways that work for them. Then they can be pushed to learn in new ways that do not come so easily.



















Procedures
Requesting Courses and Teaching Times


After the First Semester

Near the beginning of each spring, you will receive an email asking you to fill out a preference form to tell us what you hope to teach next year. This form allows you to request to teach the classes listed below and provide us with your available teaching times and expertise.  The department will consider these requests and assign courses according to preference, schedule, expertise, seniority, and, when necessary, by rotation.  

A few weeks after you turn in your teaching preference sheet, the department will inform you when your teaching assignments are available in CUNYFirst. You should check your schedule and confirm that you can teach the classes and times assigned.  It’s your responsibility to submit your course preference form by the deadline and to confirm your teaching schedule on CUNYFirst after it’s posted.

Teaching Options in the Department of English

Graduate instructors and adjuncts teaching at Queens College have the opportunity to teach many other courses in addition to ENGL 110. Teaching schedules and assignments are determined by factors such as teaching experience, instructor preferences, specialized skills, and the program’s needs.  

The department has a robust culture of curriculum development, and we share faculty resources on these blogs:

 
English 110: http://english110.qwriting.qc.cuny.edu
 
English 130: http://eng130.qwriting.qc.cuny.edu
 
English 170W: http://engl170w.qwriting.qc.cuny.edu
 
English 241, 242, 243, and 244: http://engl240s.qwriting.qc.cuny.edu
 
English 391W: http://engl391.qwriting.qc.cuny.edu
 

Writing Intensive Classes
Courses are designated W (“Writing Intensive”) by the Academic Senate, on the recommendation of the Undergraduate Curriculum Committee (UCC) and its Writing Intensive Subcommittee (WISC). To be considered for the W designation, a course must meet the following four criteria:
10-15 pages of evaluated writing in three or more assignments (either separate papers or one term paper done in stages) so that students have the opportunity to develop and improve.
Some attention to writing in class, in one or more of the following possible forms:
discussion of papers before they are written and after they are returned.
reading aloud of successful papers or models.
discussion of the rhetorical strategies or writerly qualities of course readings.
the use of informal, ungraded writing to stimulate class discussion
peer editing: opportunities for students to give each other feedback on first drafts.
discussion of goals for student writing and evaluation criteria.
Exams [if given] that include essay questions.
Maximum class-size of 30 students (NOTE: as of Spring 2010, the enrollment for W courses is capped at 25)

More information on W courses and student writing at Queens:
A guide for students: http://writingatqueens.org/files/2010/05/WACStudentBroch08.pdf/
A guide for faculty: http://writingatqueens.org/files/2010/05/WACFacultyBroch08.pdf/
Goals for Student Writing: 
http://writingatqueens.org/files/2010/05/GoalsforStudentWriting1.pdf
Observations

The union contract requires an evaluation of non-tenured members of the faculty, based in part on a classroom observation each semester.  Observations are intended to support the development of new faculty members; they are not a test.  They provide opportunities for junior faculty to benefit from our colleagues’ teaching experience.

Sometime in the first weeks of classes, your observer should contact you to arrange a time to visit your class.  He or she will sit in the class on that day and write an observation report that is submitted to the department within one week of the class observation.  Within two weeks after the observation, a post-observation conference between you and the observer must occur.  The presence of a third party at the post-observation conference is not required unless either the observer or the observee requests it.

If the attendance of a third part is not required, the observer should submit to the department a memorandum summarizing the post-observation conference.  If a third part observer is requested by either the observer or the observee, the Directors of First Year Writing will make this appointment.  He or she will then arrange for the post-observation conference and submit to the department a summary of the meeting.
	
Before the post-observation conference you will receive a copy of the observer's report. The observer's report must include the term "satisfactory" or "unsatisfactory" to indicate the overall judgment of your evaluation.  Shortly after the conference, you will receive a copy of the memoran­dum summarizing the meeting.  You are requested to sign these documents and immediately return them to the English department main office personnel; however, your signature on either of these documents only indicate that you have read the reports not that you agree with their contents.  Should you choose the respond to the report; you are free to add comments of your own.
	
Your assigned observer will attend one class meeting of one of your assigned courses. While it is the observer’s responsibility to contact you, the course, day and time of the observation are at your discretion given the constraints of your and your observer’s teaching schedules.  The department has requested your assigned observer to contact you, not only to arrange a convenient date to attend a class, but also to have some preliminary discussion with you about your general purposes in the course, the context of the particular class to be observed, and the specific objectives of that class.  You must submit your syllabus and any relevant additional course materials to your assigned observer immediately.

Here is a sample of the form that your observer will fill out.


*SAMPLE OBSERVATION FORM*


Instructor:

Date:
	
Course:

Observer:                                                          

Number of Students Present:

 
Please check the appropriate box below and add comments explaining your decision.

Was the class  ____ Satisfactory   or    ____ Unsatisfactory? 

Based on your observation, would you recommend that this instructor be assigned this course again?

Strongly Recommend

Recommend

Recommend with reservations

Not recommend


Comments:










Please evaluate the instructor according to the following criteria on the next two pages. Use the comments section to provide a rationale of your assessment in the grid. You should have a paragraph-length explanation beneath each category or provide an equivalent narrative at the end.



Syllabus

Did the syllabus contain the following information?

Yes
No
Contact Information


Office hours


Course description


Learning Goals


Course schedule


Course requirements


Appropriate policies (e.g. plagiarism, late papers, participation)



Comments:





Class Session

Evaluate how the instructor used the class time by assessing the following:

Exceeds expectations
Meets expectations
Meets some expectations
Fails to meet expectations
Clear and relevant goals were set





Concepts and subject matter were appropriate to the level of the course





Instructor and students communicated successfully





Pedagogical strategies were appropriate





Class time was used effectively





Classroom activities were relevant to lesson objectives





Class activities produced moments of discovery or insight





Comments:


Instructor-Student Interaction and Student Engagement

Evaluate the following characteristics of the instructor-student interactions and students’ level of engagement:

Exceeds expectations
Meets expectations
Meets some expectations
Fails to meet expectations
Students were engaged (e.g. taking notes, participating in discussion, listening actively)





Instructor encouraged student participation (e.g. solicited, listened to, and responded thoughtfully to students’ comments)




Class atmosphere was inclusive 







Comments: 






Further Comments (Please use this space below to describe the class session and add any additional observations. You may consider, but are not limited to, commenting on any of the following: teaching style, creative or thoughtful pedagogical techniques, and course and syllabus design. Please attach additional pages if necessary.)










Signed (observer):

I understand that my signature means only that I have read this memorandum and that I may attach any comments I wish.

Signature:							Date of post-observation meeting:



Note: All observers are required to meet with observees following the submission of this report to discuss the class session. A brief memo should then be submitted to the department summarizing this conversation. 

	

Ordering Books

Have the ISBN number available, as well as your course code and section number, and the number of students in the class. 

Call, fax, or email your order:
Joseph L. Hernandez, Course Materials Manager
Queens College Bookstore
Student Union
Phone: (718)997-3573
Fax: (718)263-8225
Email: 0888txt@fheg.follett.com
Visit us at www.queens.bkstr.com/

Many English 110 instructors no longer require students to purchase books and instead make readings available online through Blackboard or a course website. The English 110 topics site on Qwriting offers many hyperlinked readings for the topics-based courses, and instructors can post these readings to Blackboard or a class blog so students can access them electronically (note: the 110 topics site is for instructors only; do not give students access to that site. Post readings on your course Blackboard site or your course blog. In the case of a blog, make sure the site is not public and that only the students in your course have access). Additional readings you choose to assign may already be available in electronic format for you to download and post, or you can scan them from your own resources and post them. This allows you to pick and choose a list of readings that fulfills exactly what you envision for your students, without relying on textbooks that cover a broad base of standard readings that are not tailored to your course goals. The use of electronic sources also saves students money on textbooks. You should clearly define for students on the first day your policy on bringing the readings to class. Will you allow them to use a laptop or an electronic device in class? Will you require them to print them and bring hardcopies to class? 

If you would like to make a paper reader for class, you can use Reprographics on campus or the copy store next to Gino’s on Kissena. 

Missing Class

If you have to miss class, please notify someone in the English department office and the directors of First Year Writing. If you have to miss more than one class over the course of the semester, please make arrangements to have someone substitute for you and make sure you notify someone in the First Year Writing Program.

Handing in Papers

Please have your students hand in papers in a secure way, either in class or over email. Do not ask your students to leave papers for you in the English department or in a box outside of your office door.  

Offices

You will be sharing an office with one to two other people. The office administrator has already assigned you an office. Once you give her your social security number she will ask security to have a key made for your office, which you can pick up in the security office in Jefferson Hall 201. 


Printing and Photocopying

Printing is available via the computers and printers in the adjunct office on the 6th floor of Klapper. Photocopying on the departmental copiers should be limited to smaller jobs. You will need a code to access these copiers; ask the English department main office personnel for a user name and password. 
For larger photocopying needs, use the reprographic services at Speedy Q Printshop: https://printshop.qc.cuny.edu/DSF/storefront.aspx?6xni2of2cF3adb+7pAgBQDokgTW723roFPQ0pIhQDfLRl026EjDU7t/ftRS1VgNe/

Copyright Issues

Below is a general guideline for copyright issues when duplicating and handing out articles and other published material in your class, and CUNY’s official policy on copyright can be found at: http://www.cuny.edu/about/administration/offices/la/copyright-materials/permission.html/. To avoid problems with duplicating costs and copyright issues, consider placing supplementary readings on reserve at the library (see Appendix II, Rosenthal Library). Class blogs or other sites where you make readings accessible to students should be password protected in order to avoid issues of copyright infringement.

Observing Copyright

You may use materials from any textbook, reader, or other source provided that you do not violate the copyright law.
Copyright law allows you to make one copy of a copyrighted piece for each student in your class—
a. if the material copied is brief, and
b. if the copying isn’t done on a regular basis (is “spontaneous”) or as a substitute for buying textbooks or periodicals.
More specifically:
a. A piece of prose is sufficiently brief when it is either a complete article, story or essay of less than 2500 words, or an excerpt from a prose work of not more than 1000 words (or 10 percent of the work, whichever is less).
b. Copying is sufficiently “spontaneous” if the decision to use it and its actual use in class are too close for the teacher to write requesting permission from the publisher.
c. Not more than one short poem, article, or story or two excerpts may be copied from the same author, or more than three from the same collective work or periodical volume during one class term.
You may not do this multiple copying more than nine times per term for one course.
d. The same piece should not be copied from term to term by the same teacher.
e. (very important) Department-paid photocopying may not be done as a substitute for the purchase of textbooks, anthologies, compilations, or collective works.
In practical terms, the English Department will not photocopy materials in violation of copyright laws.

Making Handouts

Many teachers create their own handouts to meet the specific needs of a class.  Most then keep these on file and use them for years.  You can design a resource handout that explains a concept (like thesis statements) and provides examples, paper assignments, and in-class exercises.  If students have difficulty with, say, spotting the passive voice, a brief handout might identify those problems particular to your class.  When you want to design a handout, you should quickly check with your colleagues, the English 110 website, or a few textbooks for supplementary information that the texts you’re using may not include.

Be as concise as possible, and gear your own style to your student audience (clear, simple sentences, numbered examples, etc.). If you take the time and trouble to design a handout, stress to your students that they’re responsible for reading it.  Many teachers make handouts because this helps them to focus material, to structure class, and to formalize for themselves what they know about a certain topic.  However, while handouts are a most useful teaching aid, never feel compelled to make them unless you see a clear purpose for so doing.  A blizzard of handouts will just numb your students, and thus become counterproductive. As noted earlier, it might be useful to put these documents on a course blog or Blackboard, so students can refer to these supplementary materials online.

Referring Students to the Writing Center
Kiely Hall 229; (718) 997-5676
The Writing Center’s mission is to help students grow and mature as writers by helping them build on their strengths and overcome whatever difficulties they may have with writing. Their goal is to make better writers, not better essays. Specific essays will improve, but only because their writers are sharpening their abilities. 
In other words, the Writing Center is not an essay repair shop. Tutors will not edit or proofread essays; instead, they will help writers learn how to do these things for themselves. Nor will tutors tell writers what to write, what to think, or give them ideas. In this way, as much as possible, they work with students in a nondirective fashion through individual sessions in which writers work one-on-one with undergraduate or graduate writing tutor. 
All writers have problems; even accomplished writers may experience difficulties with writing when they try to write about complex and unfamiliar subjects, when they attempt new writing tasks, when conditions undermine their ability to write, or when problems distract them. At such times, they will seek out feedback from other writers. Student writers face similar obstacles, and they deserve (and get) our attention and respect when they attempt to address them.
The help they provide seeks to promote independence. The advice they give in tutorial sessions is professional and, as already stated, nondirective. The tutoring sessions belong to the students, and that is why students have access to the records the writing center keeps of their work and why they do not notify teachers of their students’ visits if students ask us not to.
To assist QC students with their writing, the Writing Center offers a number of different services:
A. In-Person Appointments:
Students needing help with their writing can get a one-hour drop-in appointment or be assigned a weekly one-hour appointment during these hours:
Monday – Thursday: 10:00am – 2:00pm & 3:00-8:00pm 
Friday: 10:00am – 1:00pm
Saturday: 10:00am – 2:00pm 
The aspects of writing to be covered will be decided by the student and the tutor or by instructor recommendation. This personalized work aims to correct specific writing problems and reinforce writing strengths. The initial appointment will be for four consecutive weeks; it can be extended beyond that period if the tutor recommends it and the student attends each session. If a student misses the first appointment, he/she will lose it. 
B. “Dropping-In”:
A student who needs help with writing can get a “Drop-In” appointment by reserving one of the drop-in hours we now have scheduled each day or by coming to the Writing Center at the beginning of each hour during our hours of operation. 
C. Online Tutoring:
A student can get feedback on essays via the internet. For more information, go to http://writingatqueens.org/the-writing-center/
Please be sensitive about when and how you refer students to the writing center; while not a punishment or a sign of remediation, a recommendation for a writing center visit might be perceived as such.

Dealing with Suspected Plagiarism

See the section on CUNY’s plagiarism policy on page 55, as well as the Queens College Academic Integrity Violation Form in Appendix III.  Note that the English Department takes plagiarism very seriously, and we see it as part of the job of English 110 to teach students how to use proper methods of citation. The Directors of First Year Writing advise you to follow the college’s policy on plagiarism, and to see us if you have questions about how to implement it.




 Appendix I: Computing on the Campus

The QC Network

Information from all over campus is networked through the Queens College web site, (www.qc.cuny.edu/).  Thanks to this network, instructors are able to communicate with and glean information from other departments around campus and, through the internet, the world at large.  Furthermore, we advantage our students by asking them to utilize these networks in our classes; by teaching them how to find and access reliable sources of information through this increasingly important technology.  Below is the information you need to set up your Queens College accounts as well as a sampling of the computer resources available at the college and a brief description of how these resources can be utilized. 

CAMS, Email, and ID Cards

CAMS is the College Account Management System. You’ll need to set up a CAMS account in order to be able to access blackboard, access the on-campus wireless, receive a QC email address, and reserve media and computer labs. 

To get a CAMS account follow these steps:
1. Ask the English department main office personnel for a letter verifying that you are teaching at QC for the fall semester. You will need to give her your social security number for this letter.
2. Fill out the Office of Converging Technologies Computer Access Form, which the English department will give you.
3. Take the letter and form to the OCT Help Desk, located in the building that connects the cafeteria and iBuilding. They will help you set up the account. 

Once you have a CAMS account you will be able to get a QC ID card, called a QCard. After activating your CAMS account, you can get your QCard on the next business day that the QCard Office is open. QCards are issued in the QCard Office, located in the Dining Hall, Room 116C, next to QTips and the QSide Lounge. You must bring two photo IDs as proof of identification (e.g., your old college ID, a driver’s license, a state-issued non-driver ID, or a passport). 

Below is the Office of Converging Technology’s procedure and for obtaining a CAMS account. This is helpful to have, should you experience any difficulty after receiving your verification letter from the English department.

How to Activate your CAMS (Email) and Active Directory Account

Every student, staff, and faculty member needs a CAMS account. CAMS Accounts are connected to emails and personal accounts.

Step 1 – To get onto CAMS, go to https://cams.qc.cuny.edu/.
Click on the yellow Sign Up Now button to begin creating your CAMS account.

Step 2 – After you click on the yellow button, a pink screen comes up asking for your information. The information needed to create a CAMS account is the:
• College ID (Social Security Number)
• PIN (Last 6 digits of the Social Security Number or last 6 digits of the CUNY ID).
• Zip Code (Based on the address given to Queens College)
• Your Status (Student. Faculty, Staff, or Guest)
In order to continue, the Agreement box has to be checked. Then you can click on Login.

Step 3 – Next, you come to Account System screen that lists two usernames:
• One for Lotus Notes/Email
• One for ADS
Both accounts should be already set to DeActivated. To continue, click on the Details button next to the Lotus Notes/Email account.

Step 4 – At this screen, you will have to click on the DEACTIVATED – Click to Activate button.

Step 5 – In order to activate the Lotus Notes/Email account, a password has to be created. Passwords have to have:
• 8 to 12 characters
• At least one number
• At least one capital letter
• Passwords must be entered twice.
After the password is created, click on the Set Password and Activate Account button.

Step 6 – The Lotus Notes/Email account should now be activated. Next, you have to activate the ADS account. To do this, click on the Details button.

Step 7 – At this screen, you will have to click on the DEACTIVATED – Click to Activate button to activate the ADS account.

Step 8 - In order to activate the ADS account, the password that was created in Step 5 has to be entered again. After you put in the password, click on Set Password and Activate Account.

Step 9 – You will be brought back to the Account System screen and both accounts will be activated. Remember to write down your username and password.

Step 10 – Click on the Logout button to complete the process. Note: CAMS Accounts take 24-48 hours to fully activate.

A Note on QC Email and Privacy

You should always use your Queens College email when interacting with students. You should avoid supplying personal information, such as your own email account address, to students. And in the very rare event that you have a problem with a student, any email correspondence that did not take place via the Queens College system cannot be used as evidence. 

Email should reflect careful, professional, and courteous writing, especially because it can easily be forwarded to others. Never assume that no one other than the addressee will read your email. Be careful about attachments and broad publication of messages. Copyright laws and license agreements do apply to email. 

A user can expect files and data that he or she generates to be private information, unless he or she takes action to reveal it to others. Should a legitimate College need exist, however, a duly authorized College official may monitor a users' keystrokes or may access a user’s files or data. A non-exclusive list of examples of appropriate reasons for such action includes the following:

Repair or maintenance of computing equipment as the College may deem necessary, including the testing of systems in order to ensure that appropriate levels of function, bandwidth, performance, and storage are being provided; 
Investigation of improper or illegal use of College I.T. resources; 
Response to an appropriate public records request, to an administrative or judicial order, or to a request for discovery in the course of litigation, or to any other action required by law.

Although the College has no interest in invading any user’s privacy, users should be aware that no computer system is entirely secure. Unauthorized individuals, working inside or outside of the College’s system, may find ways to access files despite the College’s best efforts to enforce security. Therefore, all users should be aware that the College cannot and does not provide any guarantee of user privacy.

CUNYFirst
You will need CUNYFirst to access the most essential documents for your classes—your class rosters, attendance verifications, etc.  The acronym stands for Fully Integrated Resources and Services Tool, and it is a system that the college uses to keep track of all kinds of data.  To use it, you need an account.  If you didn’t submit paperwork for CUNYFirst when you were hired, see Kim Smith right away to get it.
After your account is established, you can access CUNYFirst here: http://www.qc.cuny.edu/CUNYfirst/Faculty/Pages/default.aspx/ All course materials can be accessed through the “Faculty Center.” To reach the “Faculty Center” after logging in, click “HR/Campus Solutions,” then “Self Service” (both in the right column). “Faculty Center” should be in the lower right corner.  

Blackboard

The Office of Educational Technology manages the Blackboard Course Management System. Blackboard is a system which allows you to put your course materials on a web page and allows access to these materials only to the students registered in your course. Blackboard will allow you to email all of your students at once, establish discussion threads where you and your students can continuously post email on a particular subject, or even have real-time discussion with students. Blackboard allows you to put practice exams on line, to monitor the scores students receive on these exams, limit the number of times an exam may be taken, and to put the students' grades on line, as well. You can also establish groups within your course and allow each to have its own private space to share email and files.  For more information, go to http://qcpages.qc.cuny.edu/edtech/blackboard/




MyQC

MyQC, Queens College’s Intranet, allows all the members of our community—faculty, staff, and students—to share information more easily with one another. Many resources not available on the main QC website are available here. MyQC is activated through your CAMS account. 

Using Technology in Your Classroom

The First Year Writing program at Queens College is committed to discovering new ways to facilitate classroom learning with technology.  While we work within CUNY’s budgetary constraints and we also recognize the ways that educational technologies can work to enrich the corporations that sell them, we also encourage our instructors to find new ways to use digital technologies for pedagogical good.

Qwriting.org

Queens College’s blogging and wiki platform is at http://qwriting.org/. It hosts Wordpress software and MediaWiki and is available for faculty and student use. Many instructors set up a course blog through the QC Wordpress platform. For help with Qwriting, visit http://help.qwriting.org/.

Checking Out Media Equipment

Projectors: If you want a projector for your class, you can check one out from the English department main office. We have four projectors and two laptops (PCs) available. Please take care of this equipment; if something happens, we do not have the means to get replacements. 

Speakers: The English department has a speaker system that can be used with a projector and laptop to show video in class. It is in a canvas bag in the same drawer as the projectors. Ask the office staff to help you locate and sign out this equipment.
Laptop cart: The English department has a laptop cart with 25 laptops in it that can be used for classes taught in Klapper. If you are interested in using it, ask Amy Wan. 
Media Services: You can order projectors, DVD players/TVs, and screens (especially helpful if you teach in a classroom with no screen...they deliver!) through media services. There is a link to a request form at MYQC: https://myqc.qc.cuny.edu/Pages/MediaServicesRequest.aspx/
 

Reserving Computer Classroom Spaces
Computer labs: If you are interested in being in a computer lab a few times during the semester, you can reserve a computer classroom through OCT. You can reserve a room at the "Computer Lab Request" link at MyQC: https://myqc.qc.cuny.edu/Pages/ComputerLabRequest.aspx/
 
Office of Converging Technology

The User Services division of the Office of Converging Technologies at Queens College is responsible for the following: 
Help Desk 
Provides IT support assistance to Queens College faculty, staff, and students in a wide range of computer-related issues. Support is available for issues regarding hardware/software problems, virus removal, software updates, QC user ID, Lotus Notes, CUNY portal access, connecting to the QC wireless network, and any other related to technology. 
Assistance is available via phone, web, email, or in person.
Phone at 718-997-4444 
In person by visiting us in the Dining Hall, Room 151 
Email to help@qc.cuny.edu 
Media Services 
Provides technical support for media equipment such as projectors, video systems, sound systems, document cameras, and the technology-enhanced classrooms (TEC). Media Services provides media equipment for classrooms and also provides setup and support for events that require audio and visual equipment. Media resources include satellite links, as well as library collections of multimedia, film, video, and slide materials to support both classroom teaching and research. 
OCT Labs 
Provides open and instructional computer laboratories to Queens College faculty and students in the I Building, Powdermaker Hall, Kiely Hall, and Science Building. Laboratories are equipped with new Intel-based Apple and Dell computers. Combined, OCT's lab facilities offer more than 350 Windows and Macintosh computers for classroom and general use. 
OCT Labs also manage classroom labs for instructional purposes, each equipped with one or more technological enhancement, such as, projectors, plasma displays, classroom management software, or Smartboards.
For more information on technology at Queens College, visit the Center for Teaching and Learning’s technology resource page: http://www.qc.cuny.edu/Academics/SupportPrograms/CTL/Resources/Pages/technology.aspx/

Appendix II: Rosenthal Library at Queens College

Scheduling a Library Session
The librarians at the Rosenthal Library want to make your session(s) a valuable experience for your students and yourselves. There are a few points to remember when scheduling a class in the Library:
Please give the Library two weeks advance notice when requesting a particular Library session date. It is a good idea to have an alternate date in mind, in case the Library classrooms on the date you want are already taken.
The library sessions are most successful when the librarian is given the assignment at the time you are scheduling the class, so that he/she can plan and tailor the instruction to it. The generic classes with no assignment given tend to be less successful, both for the students and the librarian.
Due to the amount of information the librarians need to teach the students and the limited time available, Library tours are not given during the session. Instead, we request you tell your students to explore the Library website on their own, with its explanatory text and Maps (http://qcpages.qc.cuny.edu/Library/information/maps.php/) to learn about our services and collections. When a physical tour is preferred, the Library will arrange such tours outside of the library session, through the Instructional Services Office upon request of the instructor.
Instructors are expected to remain with the class during the duration of the Library session.
Please tell your students to meet you directly at your designated Library classroom at the appointed day/time.
As a general rule, the faculty can expect the librarians to cover:
1. general orientation to the Library (service points, hours, where to do for help, stacks/call numbers for locating material)
2. library homepage and its organization
3. connecting from off campus 
4. distinguishing between popular magazines and scholarly journals
5. choosing a topic, broadening/ narrowing, Boolean searching,  keyword and subject searching
6. CUNY+ catalog ( locating books/e-books/journals in the catalog, CLICS service, My Account)
7. finding e-Journals 
8. periodical databases--identifying and performing searches in Academic Search Complete, Lexis Nexis (other as appropriate)
9. evaluating information sources critically
10. lab time 
Instructional Services Office (RO 224) is open Monday to Friday, 10am to 2pm.
To schedule a Library session contact:
Ms. Angela Rao
Office Manager
angela.rao@qc.cuny.edu
718-997-3747

For questions about a Library session contact:
Prof. Alexandra de Luise
Coordinator of Instructional Services
alexandra.deluise@qc.cuny.edu
718-997-3748
Putting Materials on Reserve at Rosenthal

Reserve Collection: General Information
The Rosenthal Library's Reserve Collection consists of required readings assigned by Queens College (QC) faculty, reserve videos to be used in the Media Center, and other items. These collections can be accessed using your valid QC ID card and may be requested by CUNY+ Call number from the Library's 3rd Floor Circulation/Reserve Desk.
Information for Faculty: What You Must Provide
In order for your materials to be processed and made available to your students at the start of the semester, please follow these guidelines:
One request form (see http://qcpages.qc.cuny.edu/library/services/borrowing/reserves.php#forms) must be submitted for each item you want on Reserve with
a complete citation filled out on the form,
your date needed by filled out on the form,
a photocopy of article or book chapter you are requesting (the Library does not photocopy),
a syllabus for your course with your requests.
Photocopies to be scanned must be very good quality and include a complete citation typed or clearly printed on the first page.
Submission Deadlines are generally 6 weeks before the start of the semester. Requests submitted after these deadlines will be processed on a “first come, first serve” basis—please keep in mind that new book orders may require up to several weeks to process. Material that must be located or recalled will require additional time.
Material which CAN be placed on Reserve
Books owned by the Library—to expedite your request please get the books from the stacks and bring them to the Level 3 Circulator/Service Desk.
Videotapes owned by the Library.
Personally owned videotapes (not duplicated videos); the Library is not responsible for loss of or damage to personal copies.
Personal copies of books (the Library is not responsible for loss of or damage to personal copies).
Photocopies of articles or book chapters you are requesting (the Library does not photocopy).
Course ephemera: Syllabus, assignments, etc.
Student papers—you must include a written permission signed by the student. For a copy of the form, click here: Student Papers Request.
Material which CANNOT be placed on Reserve
Library reference books or reference videos are not placed on Reserve; refer students to the Reference area or Media Center where materials can be used.
Interlibrary Loan books.
Library periodicals.
Electronic Reserves Material
Materials may be submitted in paper format, or in an electronic format (Word, Excel, PDF, HTML)—either on diskette, CD, or as email attachments.
Lengthy documents will be broken into smaller parts to minimize downloading and printing time.
Reserve will NOT scan/place entire books on the E-Res site.
E-Journal/E-Book Links
When an article is available in one of our electronic journals, instructors should indicate the appropriate database in their syllabus instead of placing the article on reserve. Reserve processing staff will review reading lists to determine if Rosenthal Library has electronic access to articles. Electronic journals are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week (off-campus use requires setting up access through the QC proxy server; click here for proxy server setup instructions). To find out if the Library owns an e-journal search the list of E-Periodicals (A-Z).
If you find that a book you want to place on reserve is part of our netLibrary e-book collection, your students will be able to access it 24 hours a day, 7 days a week from any Internet-connected computer provided they have set up an account. In order to set up an account one must visit netLibrary from a computer on campus. The username and password created may be used both on and off campus.
Confirmation
Staff does not send confirmation regarding the receipt or status of the request. All instructors are encouraged to view the E-Res site to check on the availability of the requested material prior to assigning it to their students.
Requested Semester Only
Material placed on Reserve will remain there for the requested semester only. Unless you request otherwise, all material will be removed from Reserve at the end of the semester: E-Res documents will be archived, Library material will be returned to stacks, and personal material will be returned to faculty.
Password Protection
Passwords will be assigned for every course page. It will be the instructor's responsibility to disseminate the password to the students. Staff will not distribute passwords to students.
Copyright Guidelines
The Library will comply with the current Copyright Guidelines for CUNY Libraries. Where materials do not fall within fair use, they may still be placed on Reserve providing permission is being sought from the copyright holder. The Library reserves the right not to accept materials for Reserve if it judges that the nature, scope or extent of the material is beyond the reasonable limits of fair use, and will not knowingly accept materials that violate copyright law. Where the faculty member has not already secured permission, the Library will work to a reasonable extent to obtain copyright clearance for material the Library places on E-Res. The Library will only pay limited permission fees. Instructors who manage their own E-Res course site must obtain copyright clearance for material they place on their site. Some material is prohibitively expensive to place on reserve electronically; in such cases, the Library will try to purchase a print copy.
Course Paks
Faculty who wish to re-use copyrighted material for more than one semester or to place large numbers of copyrighted articles/chapters on E-Res might want to consider ordering a Course Pak through the QC Bookstore. Contact the Textbook Manager at 718-997-3570 for more information.
Course Management by the Library
The Library will place material on reserve at the request of the instructor for the educational use of students. Free electronic access will be limited to the instructor and students. A copyright notice—for photocopied material and electronic material—will be available for each item. Access to material will be removed at the end of the semester.
Course Management by You
Faculty wishing to manage their own E-Res course site must provide Reserve Processing Staff with a completed and signed Course Management Application. This includes assuming responsibility for copyright for the items you place on your E-Res course site. The following can be used as guidelines for copyright compliance: Copyright Policies and Guidelines for CUNY Libraries.
Media Center 
The Multimedia Commons houses a variety of material, equipment, and facilities. Laptops for use by Queens College students can be borrowed here, and the Library's DVD, VHS and CD-ROM audio, video, and digital text collections are housed and screened on the media viewing workstations here. Microforms can be paged and used in this area and assistance is provided for the adjacent Educational Curriculum Center. We are open at all times the Rosenthal Library is open.
Video/Film Request Template
For use by Queens College Faculty only
Please use this template to request videos for classroom showing from any CUNY library including Queens College. NOTE: Some CUNY Schools do not lend their video titles.
All video requests must be submitted at least 3 weeks in advance.
Please keep in mind that the probability of obtaining a film outside of the CUNY consortium is significantly lower than acquiring them from a CUNY school.
If for any reason Media is unable to process a film request, you will be notified within 5 business days.
When your film has arrived you will receive an email stating when you can pick up the video.
Remember to reserve desired classroom equipment with OIT, Kiely 183. 718-997-5960.
Please send an email with the subject line titled "Video Request Form" to qc_libav@qc.cuny.edu providing the following information: Name, Department, E-mail, Phone #, 14 digit Library ID, Video Title(s), CUNY Library: Optional, Call #: Optional, Requested Showdate, Alternate Showdate, Comments: Optional (e.g.: Director, Actor/Actress, Description, etc.). Note: Any video request NOT submitted by email will not be processed! Media is not responsible for handwritten or telephone request. If you have any questions please contact the Multimedia Commons at (718) 997-3712.

Multimedia Research Consultation
The Media Librarian is available to advise and consult with students and faculty on selections for classroom use or individual use. The librarian can help you focus on topics and identify media that meet your research needs. Upon request the Media Librarian can provide a custom-made, annotated mediagraphy for faculty on a given topic. Contact Lisa Flanzraich at Lisa.Flanzraich@qc.cuny.edu or (718) 997-3673.

Circulation Privileges
Most materials in the Multimedia Commons, such as videos and CD-ROMs, may be charged out directly from the Multimedia Commons Service Desk. Loan periods vary. Read the Borrowing Policies or consult with Library staff to get more details.

Computing/Internet Access
All computer use is subject to the Queens College computer user guidelines.
Collections and Equipment
The Multimedia Commons has a variety of equipment that supports the Center's resources. Included are computer stations with a networked printer, videocassette viewing stations, microfilm/fiche readers and printers, microprint readers, CD and audiocassette players, DVD players, headphones, and photocopiers.
Audio Cassettes: Our collection includes audio cassettes covering several subjects, including music, literature, instructional tapes, etc.

Digital Cameras: Media owns five 10 Megapixel Canon Power Shot A480 Digital Cameras. Each Digital Camera is loaned out with a Camera Kit. The Camera Kit comprises 9 essential items: 4GB SD Memory Stick, 4 Rechargeable Batteries, Battery Charger, Audio/Visual Cable, Camera Pouch, Camera Carrying Case, USB Cable, Camera Manual, and Tripod. None of the items within the Camera Kit can be checked out separately. The loan period for the Digital Cameras, which can only be borrowed by Queens College students, is 7 days.

CD ROMS: The collection complements the liberal arts curriculum. Some of these include periodicals and discs to accompany books in our collection.

CDs: Music CDs for teaching elementary grades are available for both in-house and off-campus use. All other CDs are housed in the Music Library.

Government Data: We house a large collection of US government publications, published in CD-ROM format by various government agencies including Bureau of the Census, Department of Agriculture, Geological Survey, Department of Commerce, and others.

Microinfo: The microform holdings include microfilm, microfiche, and microcards. These encompass many journal titles, the complete New York Times from 1851 to the present, foreign language newspapers, ERIC documents, Early American Imprints, English and American Drama of the 19th Century, and other collections.

TESTS: Tests on Microfiche from the Educational Testing Service (ETS) provides microfiche copies of certain unpublished tests as a service to educators and psychologists.

TI-83 Plus: The TI-83 Plus is a calculator produced by Texas Instruments. Serving as an upgrade to the TI-83, it has all the features of a scientific calculator as well as advanced graphing capabilities.

TOEFL Collection: The Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) includes texts and audiocassettes designed to help students for whom English is a second language.

Video/DVD Collection: The Library holds over 2500 videos and DVD's. This is a collection strong in African-American Studies, American History, Sociology, Latin American Studies, Geography, Dance, Education, Art, Chinese Cinema, and the Sciences. All videos are indexed in CUNY+, the Library's online catalog.

Classroom Viewings

Queens College Faculty may request QC and CUNY-owned videos for classroom showing. To ensure availability, we recommend at least three weeks advance booking. 
Faculty Video Use Policy
Almost all videos in the Library’s collection may be borrowed by all persons with Queens College Library borrowing privileges. Loan periods will vary from three hours to a maximum of seven days for most of the video collection: You may always come to the Queens College Library to borrow one.
Queens College Faculty who wish to use a video in their courses have two other options as well:
CUNY Owned Videos in the Classroom
Queens College faculty may request any video owned by a CUNY Library including Queens College by using the request form available in the Library's Multimedia Commons.
Use CUNY+ to determine the title of the video as well as the CUNY school that owns it.
Be sure to provide at least one alternate use date in case it is unavailable for your initial requested time.
As many of these videos may be borrowed by others, we recommend at least three weeks advance notice.
The Library does not provide equipment for the classrooms. For a classroom showing make sure you also contact OCT to reserve viewing equipment (Kiely Hall Room 183, 718-997-5060).
Your video request will be confirmed by email as soon as we determine its availability.
Videos and the Reserve Library
Queens College Library videos may be placed on Reserve.
All videos placed on Reserve must comply with Library Reserve Guidelines.
Reserve Library video users have priority at most Library previewing stations.
Previewing stations may not be reserved.
No other Library's videos may be placed on Reserve.
For more information contact: Mr. Moddie Breland, Multimedia Commons.
Group Viewings in the Library

Queens College students can also review course-related visual materials in the small group viewing areas in the Multimedia Commons. Areas are available on a first-come, first served basis to two or more present students. Bring items checked out from the Circulation/Reserve desk or title and call number information to retrieve non-reserve items from the multimedia collection.

Some helpful library links for students: 

 CUNY Information Competency Tutorials 
http://www.hostos.cuny.edu/library/info_lit/library/


Instruction @ Queens College Libraries (tutorials, quizzes)
http://qcpages.qc.edu/library/research/instruction/tutorial/home.htm/


Prior to class, students can also consult our  glossary of terms
http://qcpages.qc.edu/Library/research/instruction/glossary.php/


And if they need directions to our classroom and/or service points, they can look at the Rosenthal Library (maps)
http://qcpages.qc.cuny.edu/Library/information/maps.php/

















Appendix III: Useful Queens College Information

ID Cards, Offices, Mailboxes

You will need a QC ID card (a QCard) for accessing the library. After obtaining a CAMS account (see page 74) you can go the QCard Office (Dining Hall, room 116C) and they will issue you an ID card. 

The English department will assign you an office that you will share with one or two other adjuncts. You will need to schedule a minimum of one hour per week in the office (see page 43) so students have a time and place where they can arrange to meet with you outside of class hours. You will need to go to Security (Jefferson Hall 201) to pick up the key to your office.

The English department adjunct office on the 6th floor of Klapper Hall has computer and printers available to you for your printing needs. Photocopying in the English office (Klapper 607) is available, but the two copiers are shared by the entire department and should therefore be limited to smaller jobs. You will need a code to access these copiers; ask the English department main office personnel for a user name and password. 

A mailbox will be assigned to you in the English department office, Klapper 607. It is important that you check your mailbox regularly, as this is where the department will distribute important information, where you can have sample textbooks from publishers sent, etc.


Useful Phone Numbers, Websites, and Email Addresses

English department: Klapper Hall 607, 718-997-4600; http://www.qc.cuny.edu/academics/degrees/dah/english/Pages/default.aspx/
Annmarie Drury, First Year Writing Co-Director; Klapper 631; annmarie.drury@qc.cuny.edu
Gloria Fisk, First Year Writing Co-Director; Klapper 632; gloria.fisk@qc.cuny.edu 
Chris Williams, First Year Writing Co-Director: Klapper 641; Christopher.Williams@qc.cuny.edu
Amy Wan, First Year Writing Co-Director: Klapper 634; amy.wan@qc.cuny.edu; 718-997-4673
Kevin Ferguson, Acting Director, Writing at Queens: Klapper 711; 718-997-4707; kevin.ferguson@qc.cuny.edu
Rosenthal Library: 718-997-3700; http://qcpages.qc.cuny.edu/library/
Academic Advising Center: 718-997-5599; http://advising.qc.cuny.edu/
Office of Converging Technology: 718-997-3009; http://www.qc.cuny.edu/computing/Pages/default.aspx/
Media Services: 718-997-5960; http://www.qc.cuny.edu/Computing/MediaServices/Pages/Welcome.aspx/

Bookstore: 718-997-3573; http://www.bkstr.com/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/HelpStoreInfoView?langId=-1&catalogId=10001&storeId=10208&demoKey=d
Academic calendar: http://calendar.qc.cuny.edu/
Human Resources: 718-997-4455; http://www.qc.cuny.edu/hr/Pages/default.aspx/

Office of Special Services for Students with Disabilities: 718-997-5870; http://qcpages.qc.cuny.edu/spsv/oss_contact_us.html/
Counseling and Resource Center: 718-997-5420; http://www.qc.cuny.edu/StudentLife/services/counseling/Pages/default.aspx/


For your information, below is the Academic Integrity Violation Form, also available on the Student Affairs website at: http://www.qc.cuny.edu/StudentLife/services/studev/Documents/AcademicIntegrityViolationForm2.pdf/
Please note that the section on plagiarism (page 56) instructs you to consult the First Year Writing directors before taking any action in the case of suspected plagiarism.


Vice President for Enrollment Management & Student Affairs City University of New York-Queens College Academic Integrity Violation Form 

REPORTER NAME: 

DEPARTMENT: 

TELEPHONE NUMBER 

E-MAIL ADDRESS: 

COURSE TITLE 

COURSE NUMBER: 

INCIDENT DATE(S): 

NAMES OF STUDENT(S) INVOLVED: 

STUDENT ID #: 

VIOLATON TYPE:

PLAGIARISM 

CHEATING 

OTHER

ACTION TAKEN: 

Case referred to the Office of the VP for Student Affairs for documentation purposes only ____ 

Case referred to the Office of the VP for Student Affairs for judicial action ____

Case resolved by Department. No judicial action requested ____

Did the Faculty member meet with the Student about the charges? 

Did the Student involved admit to the academic integrity charges presented to him/her? 

Did the student explain to the faculty member, why he/she violated the Academic Integrity Policy? 

Please provide description of incident witnessed by faculty/supporting staff, as well as any additional information, such as, supporting documents, exams, and witness accounts, in the box provided below. 
Please submit all documentation, including this form, to the Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs and Enrollment Management, located in room 100 of Frese Hall. 

The contents of this document, and its attachments, are solely intended for official use by the Office of Judicial Affairs, and are CONFIDENTIAL in nature. 

Faculty Members will be notified and asked to meet and discuss the case with a Student Conduct Officer. 

Faculty Member Name: 

Faculty Member Signature: 

Date Submitted:

Acronyms for Commonly Used Buildings
KP = Klapper
KY = Kiely
HH = Honors Hall
RA = Rathaus
RZ = Razran














Appendix IV: Handout on English 110 for Students


This handout is a useful resource for students who have questions about English 110 and placement in the course. 



First Year Writing Program
Queens College

Writing is fundamental to a Queens College education and the first step is English 110: College Writing 1. With no more than 20 students, these intimate seminars are the single course that all Queens College freshmen experience. For this reason, the College Writing curriculum is designed to give students a basic understanding of the principles and methods of college writing that they will continue to practice and master in their other classes. In short, this class offers the foundation for future success in any student’s major field of study. Students can expect a lively, engaging, and interactive classroom with a smaller class size than usual. Students will be able to share ideas with peers, work with digital texts and environments, workshop pieces of writing, use and understand the library’s resources, participate in discussion-based classes, and help to build a community of learners in their first year.
Ultimately the purpose of English 110 is to facilitate the entry of students into the cross-curricular dialogue of the college. College Writing I will help students understand the recursive practices of reading, writing, thinking, and revision, which are central to the making and representation of knowledge. 
Your English 110 class will be in an FYI community, which means everyone in your class will also be enrolled in the same General Education class. The Freshman Year Initiative is a unique program that brings entering students together in two linked courses during their first semester at Queens College. Students in a College Writing course focused on “NYC” might also be linked to an Urban Studies course, or those choosing the topic “Evolution” would be in a linked Anthropology class. Students will experience courses that are intellectually stimulating introductions to the liberal arts and the work of college, as well as be encouraged to create a dynamic interplay between the course contents, methods, and disciplinary perspectives introduced in the linked courses.





How does English 110 fit into the Queens College curriculum?
English 110 is one of two required composition courses. The second is College Writing 2, which will be offered in a variety of departments in the second semester. Students must fulfill both college writing requirements before they have taken 60 credits and preferably in their freshman year.  

Can I be exempt from English 110?
Transfer students can be exempt from this course only if they have taken a similar course and worth the same (or greater) number of credits that has met the requirements of the guidelines and learning goals for English 110. Equivalent CUNY courses are listed on TIPPS. If you think you’ve taken a course that is equivalent at a non-CUNY institution, you should find out if the course is equivalent at your transfer credit evaluation. If the course is one that is not on the equivalency list, you can have the course evaluated through the First Year Writing program. Because English 110 is a class that prepares students for the rigorous writing demands of Queens College, the school does not award exemptions for AP exams, the CLEP exam, a college preparatory or bridge program that is not “College Now” through CUNY, or exemptions from other schools. 

Is English your second or third language?
Students who speak a first language other than English might find it helpful to enroll in English 95 before taking English 110. English 95 is a credit-bearing course specifically designed for those who want or need additional writing instruction in advance of English 110, which the student can then take in the following semester. You do not need to be an international student or have an official ESL designation to take this course. Those interested in signing up for English 95 can register in the CESL office in Kiely 227.





What is College Writing 2? 
All Queens College students need to enroll in a College Writing 2 class after the successful completion of English 110: College Writing 1. College Writing 2 will be offered in departments and divisions across campus. Students will be encouraged to take their second writing course in the departments of their majors (or in departments whose methodologies are similar or complementary), so that they learn to gather and analyze evidence in ways that their discipline values most. Thus, students might choose from a variety of College Writing 2 titles such as: Writing about History, Writing about Biology, Writing in the Social Sciences, or Writing about Literature.  Along with English 110: College Writing 1, College Writing 2 will satisfy the CUNY English composition requirement. 

What are W classes?
W classes are writing-intensive classes and are designated with a W at the end of the course number (e.g., ENGL 151W, SOC 210W). English 110: College Writing 1 is the college-wide prerequisite for W classes, although departments might have additional prerequisites for specific courses. We recommend students successfully complete their College Writing 2 course before enrolling in any W class. Queens College students must complete two W courses in order to graduate. 
 

Appendix V: Useful Links, Handouts, and Sample Assignments



Helpful Writing Sites and Platforms

Tutoring provided by the Writing Center (http://writingatqueens.org/the-writing-center/), including regular one-on-one sessions, drop-in sessions, and e-tutoring. 
Writing guides and handouts and other useful information available on the Writing at Queens web site (www.writingatqueens.org).
Revisions: A Zine on Student Writing (http://qcpages.qc.cuny.edu/Writing/zine.htm)
“Writing Intensive Courses: A Guide for Students” (http://writingatqueens.org/)
“Goals for Student Writing at Queens College” (http://writingatqueens.org/) 

Kerry Walk’s Teaching with Writing, from the Princeton Writing Program (Our pedagogy is strongly influenced by that of the Princeton Writing Program, which is described more fully in Kerry Walk’s Teaching with Writing.  It provides an invaluable resource for new instructors, particularly as you develop your own reading and writing assignments.): http://english110.qwriting.org/files/2010/01/TWW.pdf/  

Many useful writing and other teaching resources are available at the Center for Teaching and Learning:  http://www.qc.cuny.edu/Academics/SupportPrograms/CTL/Pages/default.aspx/

The 110 Topics Blog is located here: http://english110.qwriting.org/. You can look at model course overviews and syllabi. The password for protected material is “english110”. 

Samples of other English syllabi can be found at: http://englishdept.qwriting.org/syllabi/. The password for protected material is “klapper”.

The Qwriting site (http://qwriting.org/) is QC’s blogging and wiki platform. It hosts Wordpress software and MediaWiki and is available for faculty and student use. Students must activate their QC account in order to get an account. For help with Qwriting visit http://help.qwriting.org/.


Bibliography for Teachers

Provided below is an incomplete list of sources that might be helpful to incoming instructors.

Background Material (Theory):

Foster, David. A Primer for Writing Teachers. Montclair, NJ: Boynton/Cook, 1983.
Harris, Joseph.  A Teaching Subject: Composition Since 1966.  Prentice Hall, 1997.
Lindemann, Erika. A Rhetoric for Writing Teachers. New York: Oxford UP, 1987.
Odell, Lee. Theory and Practice in the Teaching of Writing: Rethinking the Discipline. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1993.
Tate, Gary, Amy Rupiper and Kurt Schick.  A Guide to Composition Pedagogies.  Oxford: Oxford UP, 2001.

Teaching Guides (Practice):  

Bean, John. Engaging Ideas: The Professor's Guide to Integrating Writing, Critical Thinking, and Active Learning in the Classroom. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1996.
Gross Davis, Barbara.  Tools for Teaching.  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass, 1993.
McKeatchie, Wilbert, et al.  McKeatchie’s Teaching Tips.  11th ed.  Boston:  Houghton-Mifflin, 2002.
The St. Martin’s Guide to Teaching Writing.  
Kerry Walk’s “Teaching with Writing”: www.princeton.edu/writing/university/resources/TWW.pdf/

Additionally, there is a growing library of books and articles in the WaQ Resource Library (316 Razran Hall) on topics related to writing, teaching, and learning. Please stop by and check it out. If you’re looking for material on a particular topic, contact Kevin Ferguson, Acting Director of Writing at Queens. 


HANDOUTS
The Gordon Harvey handout is useful in acclimating students to the academic language we use in assessing writing. The Mark Gaipa handout is a great resource for teaching students the ways to use their research to enter an academic conversation. The peer review and conferencing section offers some suggestions on how to handle these sessions and provides sample handouts to help you direct students in responding to each other’s work.

Gordon Harvey's "Elements of the Academic Essay" 
1. Thesis: your main insight or idea about a text or topic, and the main proposition that your essay demonstrates. It should be true but arguable (not obviously or patently true, but one alternative among several), be limited enough in scope to be argued in a short composition and with available evidence, and get to the heart of the text or topic being analyzed (not be peripheral). It should be stated early in some form and at some point recast sharply (not just be implied), and it should govern the whole essay (not disappear in places).
2. Motive: the intellectual context that you establish for your topic and thesis at the start of your essay, in order to suggest why someone, besides your instructor, might want to read an essay on this topic or need to hear your particular thesis argued--why your thesis isn't just obvious to all, why other people might hold other theses (that you think are wrong). Your motive should be aimed at your audience: it won't necessarily be the reason you first got interested in the topic (which could be private and idiosyncratic, meaning unique or particular to an individual) or the personal motivation behind your engagement with the topic. Indeed it's where you suggest that your argument isn't idiosyncratic, but rather is generally interesting. The motive you set up should be genuine: a misapprehension or puzzle that an intelligent reader (not a straw dummy, meaning a made-up version of an opponent's argument that can easily be defeated) would really have, a point that such a reader would really overlook. Defining motive should be the main business of your introductory paragraphs, where it is usually introduced by a form of the complicating word "But."
3. Evidence: the data--facts, examples, or details--that you refer to, quote, or summarize to support your thesis. There needs to be enough evidence to be persuasive; it needs to be the right kind of evidence to support the thesis (with no obvious pieces of evidence overlooked); it needs to be sufficiently concrete for the reader to trust it (e.g. in textual analysis, it often helps to find one or two key or representative passages to quote and focus on); and if summarized, it needs to be summarized accurately and fairly.
4. Analysis: the work of breaking down, interpreting, and commenting upon the data, of saying what can be inferred from the data such that it supports a thesis (is evidence for something). Analysis is what you do with data when you go beyond observing or summarizing it: you show how its parts contribute to a whole or how causes contribute to an effect; you draw out the significance or implication not apparent to a superficial view. Analysis is what makes the writer feel present, as a reasoning individual; so your essay should do more analyzing than summarizing or quoting.
5. Keyterms: the recurring terms or basic oppositions that an argument rests upon, usually literal but sometimes a ruling metaphor. These terms usually imply certain assumptions--unstated beliefs about life, history, literature, reasoning, etc. that the essayist doesn't argue for but simply assumes to be true. An essay's keyterms should be clear in their meaning and appear throughout (not be abandoned halfway); they should be appropriate for the subject at hand (not unfair or too simple--a false or constraining opposition); and they should not be inert clichés or abstractions (e.g. "the evils of society"). The attendant assumptions should bear logical inspection, and if arguable they should be explicitly acknowledged.
6. Structure: the sequence of main sections or sub-topics, and the turning points between them. The sections should follow a logical order, and the links in that order should be apparent to the reader (see "stitching"). But it should also be a progressive order--there should be a direction or development or complication, not simply a list or a series of restatements of the thesis ("Macbeth is ambitious: he's ambitious here; and he's ambitious here; and he's ambitious here, too; thus, Macbeth is ambitious").  And the order should be supple enough to allow the writer to explore the topic, not just hammer home a thesis. (If the essay is complex or long, its structure may be briefly announced or hinted at after the thesis, in a road-map or plan sentence.)
7. Stitching: words that tie together the parts of an argument, most commonly 1) by using transition (linking or turning) words as signposts to indicate how a new section, paragraph, or sentence follows from the one immediately previous; but also 2) by recollection of an earlier idea or part of the essay, referring back to it either by explicit statement or by echoing key words or resonant phrases quoted or stated earlier. The repeating of key or thesis concepts is especially helpful at points of transition from one section to another, to show how the new section fits in.
8. Sources: persons or documents, referred to, summarized, or quoted, that help a writer demonstrate the truth of his or her argument. They are typically sources of 1) factual information or data, 2) opinions or interpretation on your topic, 3) comparable versions of the thing you are discussing, or 4) applicable general concepts. Your sources need to be efficiently integrated and fairly acknowledged by citation.
9. Reflecting: when you pause in your demonstration to reflect on it, to raise or answer a question about it--as when you 1) consider a counterargument--a possible objection, alternative, or problem that a skeptical or resistant reader might raise; 2) define your terms or assumptions (what do I mean by this term? or, what am I assuming here?); 3) handle a newly emergent concern (but if this is so, then how can X be?); 4) draw out an implication (so what? what might be the wider significance of the argument I have made? what might it lead to if I'm right? or, what does my argument about a single aspect of this suggest about the whole thing? or about the way people live and think?), and 5) consider a possible explanation for the phenomenon that has been demonstrated (why might this be so? what might cause or have caused it?); 6) offer a qualification or limitation to the case you have made (what you're not saying). The first of these reflections can come anywhere in an essay; the second usually comes early; the last four often come late (they're common moves of conclusion).
10. Orienting: bits of information, explanation, and summary that orient the reader who isn't expert in the subject, enabling such a reader to follow the argument. The orienting question is, what does my reader need here? The answer can take many forms: necessary information about the text, author, or event (e.g. given in your introduction); a summary of a text or passage about to be analyzed; pieces of information given along the way about passages, people, or events mentioned (including announcing or "set-up" phrases for quotations and sources). The trick is to orient briefly and gracefully.
11. Stance: the implied relationship of you, the writer, to your readers and subject: how and where you implicitly position yourself as an analyst. Stance is defined by such features as style and tone (e.g. familiar or formal); the presence or absence of specialized language and knowledge; the amount of time spent orienting a general, non-expert reader; the use of scholarly conventions of form and style. Your stance should be established within the first few paragraphs of your essay, and it should remain consistent.
12. Style: the choices you make of words and sentence structure. Your style should be exact and clear (should bring out the main idea and action of each sentence, not bury it) and plain without being flat (should be graceful and a little interesting, not stuffy).
13. Title: It should both interest and inform. To inform (i.e., inform a general reader who might be browsing in an essay collection or bibliography) your title should give the subject and focus of the essay. To interest, your title might include a linguistic twist, paradox, sound pattern, or striking phrase taken from one of your sources (the aptness of which phrase the reader comes gradually to see). You can combine the interesting and informing functions in a single title or split them into title and subtitle. The interesting element shouldn't be too cute; the informing element shouldn't go so far as to state a thesis. Don't underline your title, except where it contains the title of another text.
 ©Expository Writing Program - Harvard University












8 Strategies for Critically Engaging Secondary Sources

The strategies below are adapted, and the figures reproduced, from Mark Gaipa’s “Breaking into the Conversation:  How Students Can Acquire Authority in Their Writing,” Pedagogy 4.3 (2004):  419-37.  Note that these strategies may be used globally, as a way of framing an argument, or locally, as a way of engaging sources at a particular stage in an argument.  

Strategy 1:  Picking a Fight – Knock down a scholar’s argument and, in the best version of this strategy, replace it with one’s own.



Strategy 2:  Ass Kissing, or Riding a Scholar’s Coattails – Agree with a scholar to gain evidence and authority.  Possibly go on to defend the scholar from attack by another scholar, thus resolving a larger controversy.



Strategy 3:  Piggybacking, or Standing on the Shoulders of a Giant – Agree with a scholar (i.e., kiss ass), but then complete or extend the scholar’s work, usually by borrowing an idea or concept from the scholar and developing it through application to a new subject or new part of the conversation.



Strategy 4:  Leapfrogging, or Biting the Hand That Feeds You – Agree with a scholar (i.e., kiss ass), then identify and solve a problem in the scholar’s work—for example, an oversight, inconsistency, or contradiction.




Strategy 5:  Playing Peacemaker – Identify a conflict or dispute between two or more scholars, then resolve it using a new or more encompassing perspective.



Strategy 6:  Taking on the Establishment, or Acting Paranoid – Pick a fight with everyone in a critical conversation—for example, by showing how the status quo is wrong, a critical consensus is actually unfounded, or a dispute is based on a faulty assumption.



Strategy 7:  Dropping Out, or Finding Room on the Margins – Focus on an issue in the margins of the critical conversation, illuminating that issue and (in the best version of this strategy) ultimately redefining the conversation itself.



Strategy 8:  Crossbreeding with Something New – Inject really new material into the critical conversation to produce a new argument.  For example, bring in a theory from another discipline to reinterpret the evidence, bring in new evidence to upset an old theory or interpretation, or establish an original framework (a combination of theories, a historical understanding) to 
reinterpret the evidence.








PEER REVIEW HANDOUTS


Making Peer Conference Work for You


Group Members: ___________________________________________________________________

Day, date, time, and place of conference: __________________________________________________

Before the conference session:
1. Review your own essay.  Your peers have put a lot of effort into making your essay better.  Demonstrate that you have done the same.

2. If for some reason you make major revisions to your essay after you submit your working draft, but before the conference, please make every effort to let your readers know as soon as possible.  Send them a revised draft, or contact them and tell them not to bother with whatever aspect of the essay you’ve decided to change.  Nothing is more frustrating for a reader than investing valuable time on something the writer won’t even use.

3. Bring a copy of your draft with you to the conference so that you can follow along.

During the conference session:
4. In this space, summarize what each respondent says.  Record each person’s name so that if you realize later that you didn’t understand what was said you’ll know who to contact.

5. After listening to the respondents, take a few seconds to absorb what has been said.  If you need clarification, ask for it.  If the group has not yet made suggestions, ask them now what you can do to improve your essay.

After the conference session:
6. Carefully read the written comments of your peer reviewers and the instructor, and review your notes from the peer conference.

7. Now that you have a better sense of what is working in your essay and what still needs improvement, you need to develop a plan for revision.  You will need to use your feedback selectively.

Comments about the Conceptual Approach and the Thesis, for example, may suggest that you need to make large-scale revisions.  Think carefully about the best solution before you strategize your revisions: do you need to re-write your thesis to better fit the evidence you found, or do you need to find evidence that better fits your thesis?
Comments about Supporting Evidence, Development of Argument, or Essay Structure often indicate problems with understanding the relationship between quoted textual evidence and the specific point the writer wants to make.  However, such difficulties can also be symptomatic of a more fundamental problem with a conceptually weak Thesis.
Comments about Language and Sentence Level Errors should be the last areas you address.  You may find that many of these problems disappear once you begin addressing other issues.

8. Based on the responses and suggestions made by your group, write three specific strategies for revision in the space below.  List them according to priority.  Be specific.  Identify what you plan to revise, why it needs revision, and how you plan to revise it (e.g., “Because the last two sentences in paragraph two introduce a new idea, I will remove them and develop them into a new paragraph.”). Turn in this sheet with your final draft.

1. I will…

2. I will…

3. I will…



Sample 1: Peer Review Letter

Dear ____________________,

Thanks for letting me read your essay!  It looks like your thesis so far is:



There are some things about your essay that work really well for me.  First, on page ___, I like the way you:


Second, on page ___, I also like:



And then on page __, 



There are also some things that I think you can strengthen about the essay before you turn it in.  
First, on page ___, you can [for example: clarify, explain, support, analyze…]


Also, on page __, 



And then on page ___, 



Another thought I have about your essay is:


Sincerely,
________________________________ 





Sample 2: Peer Revision Letter

Since you will have a few days to read over and reflect on your peer’s paper, I would like you to type up a brief note to your peer outlining your major impressions of the paper.  Please include the following:

Summarize what you believe to be the main point of the paper (it will be helpful for your peer to see if it is coming across as he/she meant it to) and assess how well he/she proves it throughout the paper.

Considering such things as content, organization, flow, clarity, and format, state at least two major strengths of the paper.  If there is any way these can be made even stronger, give suggestions.

State at least two things in the paper that you think need improvement, and suggest how these improvements could be made.

Since you will be discussing your impressions with your partner on Friday, I don’t expect this to be too long; you can give the details in person.  This will just give your partner something on paper to refer back to as he/she revises.

Requirements:
A length of approximately ½-1 page, single-spaced
Bring two copies, one for me and one for your peer
Due Date:


Instructor-Led Peer Conferencing: An Introduction

Definition:   Peer conferencing is a type of peer response activity in which a small group of students (typically three to four) meets with an instructor to discuss drafts and make suggestions for revision.  The primary difference between peer conferencing and other forms of peer response is the extent to which the instructor actively participates in the group process.  In traditional peer response groups, the instructor supervises from outside the group.  In peer conferencing, the instructor participates inside the group as both a facilitator and respondent.  It is not a group advising session in which the instructor takes turns commenting on each student’s paper while the others look on; it is a collaborative process in which the student writer, the peers, and the instructor all engage in a give-and-take of ideas.  

Features: 
3-4 students, plus instructor
Students read and prepare comments on peers’ papers before the conference session
The instructor reads and prepares comments on student papers before the conference session
For each student paper the group spends 12-15 minutes commenting and offering suggestions
The student peers are primarily responsible for providing feedback on the student’s essay
The instructor is primarily responsible for managing group process and being available as a resource, but also takes turns as a respondent
The instructor typically waits to make her comments until after all of the student peers have spoken  

Purposes: 
To give the instructor more direct oversight of the peer response process
To encourage more student participation and higher quality feedback
To help students identify the features of effective academic writing and apply these standards to their own work

Benefits:
Instructor’s presence improves quality of drafts and peer comments
Every student has direct time with the instructor
Presence of peers diffuses instructor’s authority (or rather, instructor and peers mutually reinforce each other’s authority)
Another venue in which instructor can know students
Instructor saves time writing long comments on drafts that can be more efficiently delivered in person
Instructor learns how students are thinking about material and acquires new ways of creating a common discourse

Challenges:
Coordinating schedules
Potentially more time-intensive, with the following mitigating factors:
-tendency to spend less time commenting on drafts
-less time in individual conferences/more productive additional conferences
Grading participation and quality of feedback
Using interpersonal skills to manage a session

Instructor’s roles:
Initiator: (To peers) “Who would like to be first?”  “Let’s get started by focusing on the thesis statement, which seems to be the crucial task of assignment number one.”  
Inviter: (To peer) “Sam, do you also have a specific comment about this topic sentence?”   “I noticed that you have a lot of comments in the margins of page four, Sunny.  Do you want to share some of them with us?” (To writer) “Now that you have heard our comments, what do you think you will do to revise your essay?”
Clarifier/Questioner: (To peer) “You say that the essay has no thesis statement.  Why do you think the last sentence in the first paragraph does not qualify as a thesis statement?”  (To writer) “In your thesis statement you say X is true, but in your final paragraph you say Y is true.  Talk to us about which statement you think you should keep for your next draft.”
Elaborator: (To everyone) “I agree with the comments so far about the disorganization in the paper, and I think I can see the cause: the thesis statement, rather than making an argument, instead lists three topics to be discussed.  Because the argument has no logical arrangement, it’s impossible to know how the paragraphs should be organized.”
Summarizer: (To everyone) “I noticed that when Sherry commented on the conclusion, everyone nodded—including me!  It seems pretty obvious that revising the conclusion should be a pretty high priority.”
Modeler (To peers) “I noticed that Judy’s warrant in paragraph three lacked specific language analysis.  Are there other paragraphs whose warrants are not developed?
Encourager: (To everyone) “All of your ideas for how to improve this essay are right on.  You all have great instincts!”  “You can see from this essay how important transitions can be.  Use some of the ideas we’ve talked about here on your own essays.”
SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS


These four sample assignments, taken from four different topic assignment sequences, demonstrate how the essays you assign can be crafted to fit different topics. For more topic assignments, and full assignments sequences for each topic, visit the Qwriting site at http://qwriting.org/.


Assignment #1: Primary Source Argument (from “Beauty” topic)

Write an essay in which you make an argument about Edmund Burke’s definition of beauty. You should identify key passages and terms that you think are central to Burke’s definition and make an argument about how they work together to construct Burke’s conception.   

Audience: 	Those interested in Edmund Burke’s theories of beauty

Format: 	1000 words (2-3 pages); MLA style

Deadlines:	Draft due in class for peer review on:  
Final draft due in class on:

Advice:	Having studied and closely read some of Burke’s writing you should be quite familiar with his characterization of beauty. Your aim should be to “own” Burke’s definition of beauty—to know it so well that you may as well have written yourself. Think carefully about how you will structure your essay. What is the most important aspect of Burke’s definition? The answer to that question will be the central point around which you build your argument. 

(FOR INSTRUCTORS ONLY)

Type:	Analyze a single primary source to support an arguable thesis.

Pre-Draft Activities:
1 Excerpts from Burke’s Enquiry will be read together and discussed several times to prepare students for this assignment. Students will be able to and required to summarize Burke’s definition of beauty in their own words before embarking on their first draft.
2 Paper outline with feedback from instructor
3 Thesis group/class work
4 First draft and final draft cover letters to classmate and instructor, respectively



Assignment #2: Analysis: Comics and Public Events (from “Visual World” topic)

In this essay, you will compare representations of public events in comics and in traditional journalistic writing. Your task is to present an argument for the effectiveness of one medium over another in representing the event based on analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of each source for representing what Tim O’Brien terms the “story truth” of the event.

Audience: 	General public and media scholars interested in the event

Format: 	1200 words (4-5 pages); MLA style, including in-text citations and Works Cited page

Deadlines:	Draft due in class for peer review on:  
Final draft due in class on: 

Advice:	The best essays will provide a clear description of the public event, a clear explanation of O’Brien’s concept of “story truth,” and detailed analysis of the aspects of the event emphasized by the comic and by the traditional journalistic source. Your argument for which source represents the event more effectively should be grounded in your understanding of the event’s “story truth.”


(FOR INSTRUCTORS ONLY) 

Type:	Develop an argument to analyze the tension you see between two sources

Rationale: 	The purpose of this assignment is to build on the skills of visual and verbal interpretation students practiced in the first essay and to introduce the research process, including accessing traditional journalistic writing using library resources and the Web. Students will practice quotation, paraphrase and summary and will be introduced to in-text citation and the requirements of a Works Cited page. The instructor should provide a library of comics that represent public events selected from political cartoons and graphic novels.

Pre-Draft Activities:
1 In-class writing and discussion of the messages conveyed by political cartoons and graphic novels;
2 Annotating and discussing background texts on the elements of comics (McCloud and Eisner) and on O’Brien’s concept of “story truth;”
3 Identifying and accessing library research sources such as LexisNexis and the New York Times archive, including a visit to the library and follow-up sessions in class;
4 Practicing paraphrasing and summarizing sources, and incorporating quotes in student’s own writing;
5 In-class writing and peer review focused on incorporating sources and developing clear arguments;
6 Practicing in-text citations and formatting entries for a Works Cited page



Assignment #3: Testing a Theory (from “Cultural Identity” topic)

Family organization, language, and religious beliefs influence the ideas and values expressed through art and literature in and across various communities. The texts we’ve been discussing in class offer different accounts of how these factors influence cultural expression and interaction. Your task is this assignment is to use either Hall’s theory of “cultural production” or Pratt’s theory of “contact zones” to compare two of the literary texts we have discussed in class.

Audience: 	Scholars interested in cultural identity, including Stuart Hall and Mary Louise Pratt

Format: 	1200 words (4-5 pages); MLA style, including in-text citations and Works Cited page

Deadlines:	Draft due in class for peer review on: 
Final draft due in class on: 

Advice:	The best essays will provide a thorough summary of either Hall’s theory of cultural production or Pratt’s theory of contact zones using summary, paraphrase and quotation; will explain how the theory applies to each of the literary texts under analysis; and will anticipate counter-arguments. You should be able to describe the relationship you see between the literary texts in one focused sentence.


(FOR INSTRUCTORS ONLY) 

Type:	Use a secondary source as a lens to analyze a primary source, and support your thesis with evidence

Rationale: 	The purpose of this assignment is to give students practice summarizing, paraphrasing and otherwise engaging theories of cultural identity. Students apply their understanding of others’ ideas to fictional texts rather than to their own lives in preparation for the culminating research paper.

Pre-Draft Activities:
1 Annotation and analysis of Pratt's and Hall’s essays
2 Practice with framing quotations in order to apply other’s ideas to student’s own
3 Developing and reinforcing thesis statements through structure, analysis, reflection and consideration of counter-arguments
4 Practicing in-text citations and formatting entries for a Works Cited page
5 Outlining/Planning a comparative analysis



Assignment #4: Dramaturgical Research Essay (from “Page to Stage” topic)

In this culminating essay assignment you will extend your engagement with the play you evaluated in your Why This Play Now essay by applying skills of textual and thematic analysis and academic research. Your task is to analyze the play’s production history through a particular question that provides a means for assessing its relevance today. 

The first stage of your work on the essay will be conducting research using library collections and databases. Through your research, you will create an annotated bibliography that lists at least 10 academic sources and provides a 100-word summary for each source describing how it relates to your claim about the play’s production history. The second stage of your work on the essay will be preparing a draft for peer review and revision. You must bring to bear at least 5 academic sources in the final draft of your essay. 

Audience: 	Scholars interested in the play

Format: 	Annotated Bibliography: 10 sources with 100-word summaries; MLA Works Cited entries
Essay: 1500 words (5-6 pages); MLA style, including in-text citations and Works Cited page

Deadlines:	Annotated Bibliography due in class on: 
Draft due in class for peer review on:  
Final draft due in class on:

Advice:	The best essays will focus on a single guiding question that allows you to make a claim about the play’s relevance today. Questions you might consider include: Where/When has the play been performed? Which actors or theater troupes have performed it? How has it been staged or adapted over time? What did critics say about it when it was first performed? How has critical reception of the play changed over time?

(FOR INSTRUCTORS ONLY) 

Type:	Develop an analytical argument using original research that includes both primary and secondary sources

Rationale: 	The purpose of this assignment is to engage students in significant library research and to encourage them to practice synthesizing information gathered from various sources. Students apply their emerging understandings of textual features, thematic and performance elements of plays in light of the course’s main guiding question, how does a written text become a living, shared moment in the performance space? 

Pre-Draft Activities:
1 Practice annotating primary and secondary sources and organizing evidence using an outline (like the Performance Review Outline)
2 Library session focused on identifying and interpreting relevant research sources, including critical analyses, historical and contemporary reviews, and primary sources such as photographs and videos of live performances;
3 Prepare an annotated bibliography that summarizes the usefulness of sources gathered through library research
4 Practice in-text citations and formatting entries for a Works Cited page


Appendix VI: English 130
CW2 in the English Department: ENG 130
Students who elect to take CW2 in the English Department will learn how to engage with other scholars in meaningful conversations about literature.   Building methods that they will continue to practice throughout their coursework, they will become more able to:

	-Create arguable theses about literary texts.
	-Support their theses with close reading.
	-Marshal primary and secondary sources for textual analysis.
	-Find, cite, and evaluate sources using appropriate research tools.
	-Deploy critical terms effectively.
	-Converse with other scholars in the field, orally and in writing.	


A Shared Form with Varying Content
The content of ENG 130 will vary greatly from one section to the next, but the form will be shared throughout the department.  Students in ENG 130 will:
	- write three essays that build in complexity, plus a research assignment and a portfolio.  
	- revise each essay in conversation with each other and their instructor.

Essay 1: Close reading of a text using selected literary terms.

Essay 2: Close reading of a text in the context of a theoretical or historical source.

Essay 3: Close reading of a text in the context of at least two secondary sources that the student finds through research.

Research Assignment: An annotated bibliography with at least five relevant sources, produced en route to Essay 3. 

Portfolio: In a cover letter, students reflect on the writing practice they gained through their pre-drafts, drafts, and revisions over the course of the semester.

In the vocabulary of our existing curriculum, ENG 130 might:
	- Provide a missing link between ENG 110 and ENG 170; and 
	- Combine features of ENG 110, ENG 161, and ENG 165.

Goals
The reading and writing assignments in ENG 130 are designed to prepare students for the diversity of assignments that await them in upper-division English classes.  The primary aim of the course is to help students identify and practice the conventions that experienced scholars use to think more critically about literary texts.  


OVERVIEW OF A SAMPLE ASSIGNMENT SEQUENCE

Unit 1: Close reading of a single text (Draft + Revision: 4 weeks)
Reading Assignment: Three poems from different periods that contain quoted or reported speech:
		Elizabeth Bishop, “In the Waiting Room”
		Vijay Sashadri, “Bright Copper Kettles”
		W. B. Yeats, “The Second Coming”

Writing Assignment: Identify an interpretive problem in one of these poems and develop a thesis that addresses it.  Use one of the literary terms you’ve learned as a keyterm to analyze the text and support your thesis with close reading.  (4-5 pp.)
		
	Writing Lessons: 
		Thesis: Begin from a textual ambiguity to generate an arguable thesis
		Motive: Name the interpretive problem in the thesis
		Evidence and Analysis: Use close reading to open a poem to multiple 						interpretations and support a thesis; use a keyterm to drive analysis.  Quote, 				paraphrase, and cite sources effectively in MLA format.
	
	Literary Terms:
		Voice, Tone
		Line, Meter
		Character, Narrator
		Quotation		
		Indirect Speech, Reported Speech

	Pre-draft Assignment: (2-3 pp. informal response en route to the essay)
Quote a short passage from the poem whose meaning or significance is unclear to you, and write a response that identifies exactly how and where this writer loses you.  Refer to the text to show what you mean, and make at least two reasonable guesses about the meaning of the lines that you quote.  In which moments do your guesses seem plausible, and what questions remain? 

UNIT 2: Close reading of a single text in context (Draft + Revision: 5 weeks)
Reading Assignment: A Greek tragedy and a short article (5 pp.) that situates tragic drama in the context of the nascent Greek polis.

	Sophocles, Antigone
	Jean-Pierre Vernant and Pierre Vidal-Naquet, “The Historical Moment of 			Tragedy in Ancient Greece”

Writing Assignment: Use close reading of Antigone to analyze its representation of justice, and historicize your argument using your secondary source.  (5-6 pp.)

	Writing Lessons: 
		Thesis: Practice using close reading to generate arguable theses 
		Motive: Illuminate a close reading with an historical source
		Evidence and Analysis: Practice close reading with increasing 							attention to the primary text, use a secondary text 						in ways that are appropriate to the argument.   Practice citation, paraphrase, and summary 		with respect to primary and secondary texts.	
	Literary Terms: 
		Tragedy, Epic, Chorus
		Narrative
		Genre, Form
		Hero, Protagonist
		Reception

	Pre-draft Assignment: (2-3 pp. informal response en route to the essay)
Refer to a passage in the play that seems to resonate in some way with what you learn from Vernant and Naquet.  Quote one sentence from each of the two texts at the top of the page, and then write a response to consider the relationship between the two.  How do the tensions that Vernant and Naquet describe appear in the play, and what questions might you raise about the way that they appear?

UNIT 3: Close reading of a primary text in context, with original research (Annotated Bibliography + Draft + Revision: 8 weeks)	
Reading Assignment: A short novel set in post-apartheid South Africa; a theoretical text about novelistic discourse and a video excerpt that provides historical context.  
 
	J. M. Coetzee, Disgrace
	Mikhail Bakhtin, “The Topic of the Speaking Person”
	South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission Hearings (video excerpt)

Writing Assignment: Make an argument that answers an interpretive question that you raise about Disgrace.  Support your argument with close reading, using secondary texts to define your terms precisely.  You might begin with the historical and theoretical texts that we studied in class, and you should also refer to at least two sources that you find through original research.  (8-10 pp.)

Annotated Bibliography Assignment:  As you revise your essay, annotate the bibliography that you created at our library session, indicating how your sources helped you and adding any new sources that you find.   (At least 8 sources; at least 5 pp.)

	
	Writing Lessons:  
Thesis: Identify a meaningful question for literary analysis and create an analytical frame 				for it, using historical and/or theoretical 	sources when they are useful.
		Motive: Make an argument for the significance of your thesis
		Evidence and Analysis: Use close reading to guide research, following inquiry toward 			evidence.  Evaluate sources in relationship to the thesis, prioritizing the most 			useful evidence and articulating its utility.  Continue to practice source use with 				original research.

	Literary Terms:
		Dialogue, Speech
		Protagonist, Minor character
		Narrative, Plot
		Prose
		Novel
		
	Post-draft Assignment: (2-3 pp. informal response en route to the essay)
Before your draft conference, reread your draft and put an X next to all of the places where your claims feel wobbly to you, particularly with respect to evidence.  Are there any places where you have to speculate about the historical context of the novel, or the literary devices that Coetzee uses, because you’re not sure you know what you’re talking about?  Write a letter to me explaining those holes in your evidence.  Do you have any sense of what kind of evidence you might need to fill them?	

Portfolio Assignment: Re-read all of your pre-drafts, drafts, and revisions as well as the feedback you received.  Put all of these documents in a folder and write a cover letter to present them.  In the letter, reflect on the ways that you’ve developed your critical faculties and practices this semester, and also on the ways that you’d like to continue that development in your future.











